Userid: RGBLAC00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: T:\Pub 17\2010_P17_flat_121710.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2010Revenue
Service Returns
TAX GUIDE
2010
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
Dec 08, 2010

Page 2 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What's New for 2010 ................... . 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
Reminders .......................... . 2 20 Standard Deduction ............... . 137
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ........ . 140
Introduction ......................... . 3 22 Taxes ........................ . 145
23 Interest Expense ................. . 150Part One. The Income Tax Return 24 Contributions ................... . 1571 Filing Information ................... . 4 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft2 Filing Status ..................... . 19 Losses ....................... . 1663 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ... . 24 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... . 36 Business Expenses .............. . 172
27 Tax Benefits for Work-RelatedPart Two. Income Education ..................... . 1915 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... . 45 28 Miscellaneous Deductions .......... . 1956 Tip Income ...................... . 53 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ........ . 2017 Interest Income ................... . 55
8 Dividends and Other Corporate Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and CreditsDistributions ................... . 62 30 How To Figure Your Tax ........... . 2029 Rental Income and Expenses ......... . 66 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Children ...................... . 204Annuities ..................... . 74 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ...... . 21211 Social Security and Equivalent 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled ... . 221Railroad Retirement Benefits ........ . 81 34 Child Tax Credit ................. . 22512 Other Income .................... . 85 35 Education Credits ................ . 230
36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) ......... . 233Part Three. Gains and Losses 37 Other Credits ................... . 24713 Basis of Property ................. . 95
14 Sale of Property .................. . 99 2010 Tax Table ....................... . 25415 Selling Your Home ............... . 106
16 Reporting Gains and Losses ......... . 112 2010 Tax Computation Worksheet ......... . 266
Part Four. Adjustments to Income 2010 Tax Rate Schedules ............... . 267
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ....................... . 120 Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 268
18 Alimony ....................... . 132
19 Education-Related Adjustments ....... . 134 How To Get Tax Help .................. . 269
Index .............................. . 270
Order Form 
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2010) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New for 2010
At the time this publication Corrosive drywall. You may be • District of Columbia first-timeThis section summarizes important went to print, Congress able to claim a casualty loss deduc- homebuyer credit (for homestax changes that took effect in was considering legisla- tion for amounts you paid to repair bought after 2009).
CAUTION
!2010. Most of these changes are tion that would provide an in- damage to your home and house-discussed in more detail through- • Alternative motor vehiclecreased standard deduction for hold appliances that resulted fromout this publication. credit for qualified hybrid mo-real estate taxes or for a net disas- corrosive drywall. The deduction isChanges are also discussed at tor vehicles bought afterter loss from a disaster occurring in limited if you have a pending claimIRS.gov. Click on Forms and Publi- 2009, except cars and light2010. To find out if this legislation for reimbursement (or intend tocations and then on Highlights of trucks with a gross vehiclewas enacted, and for more details, pursue reimbursement) throughRecent Tax Changes. see Schedule L (Form 1040A or weight rating of 8,500 poundsproperty insurance, litigation, or
1040) or check www.irs.gov/form- or less.other means. See chapter 25.Due date of return. File Form spubs. • Extra $3,000 IRA deduction1040 by April 18, 2011. The due Personal casualty and theft lossdate is April 18, instead of April 15, for employees of bankruptAdoption credit. The adoption limit. Each personal casualty or
because of the Emancipation Day companies.credit is now refundable. Also, to theft loss is limited to the excess of
holiday in the District of Columbia claim the credit, you must include the loss over $100 (instead of the • Certain tax benefits for Mid-Ð even if you do not live in the an adoption order or decree or cer- $500 limit that applied for 2009). In western disaster areas, in-District of Columbia. tain other documents with your re- addition, the 10%-of-AGI limit gen- cluding increased Hope andturn. See chapter 37. erally continues to apply to the net lifetime learning credits andLimits on personal exemptions loss. See chapter 25. the additional exemptionand overall itemized deductions First-time homebuyer credit.
ended. For 2010, you will no You generally cannot claim the amount if you provide hous-
At the time this publicationlonger lose part of your deduction credit for a home you bought after ing for a person displaced by
went to print, CongressApril 30, 2010. However, you mayfor personal exemptions and item- the Midwestern storms, torna-
was considering legisla-be able to claim the credit if youized deductions, regardless of the
CAUTION
! does, or flooding.tion that would increase the lossentered into a written binding con-amount of your adjusted gross in- • Credit to holders of clean re-limit described above. To find out iftract before May 1, 2010, to buy thecome (AGI). newable energy bonds issuedhome before July 1, 2010, and ac- legislation was enacted and for
Self-employed health insurance after 2009.tually bought the home before Oc- more details, see the 2010 Instruc-
deduction. Effective March 30, tober 1, 2010. Also, certain tions for Form 4684. • Decreased estimated tax pay-2010, if you were self-employed members of the Armed Forces and ments for certain small busi-and paid for health insurance, you certain other taxpayers have addi- Divorced or separated parents. nesses.tional time to buy a home and takemay be able to include in your A custodial parent who has re-
the credit. See chapter 37.self-employed health insurance de- • The allowance of certainvoked his or her previous release of
duction any premiums you paid to a claim to a child's exemption must credits against the AMT, suchRepayment of first-timecover your child who was under include a copy of the revocation as the credit for child and de-homebuyer credit. If you with his or her return. See chapterage 27 at the end of 2010, even if pendent care expenses,claimed the first-time homebuyer 3.the child was not your dependent. credit for nonbusiness energycredit for a home you bought inSee chapter 21. property, credit for the elderly2008, you generally must begin re- Expired tax benefits. The fol- or the disabled, lifetime learn-paying it on your 2010 return. In lowing tax benefits have expiredStandard deduction increased. ing credit, mortgage interestaddition, you generally must repay and are not available for 2010.The standard deduction for some credit, and District of Colum-any credit you claimed for 2008 ortaxpayers who do not itemize their • Deduction for educator ex-2009 if you sold your home in 2010 bia first-time homebuyerdeductions on Schedule A of Form penses in figuring AGI.or the home stopped being your credit. For most people, these1040 is higher in 2010 than it was in main home in 2010. See chapter credits are now limited to your• Tuition and fees deduction in2009. The amount depends on 37. figuring AGI. regular tax minus any tenta-your filing status. In addition to the
tive minimum tax.annual increase for some taxpay- Roth IRAs. Beginning in 2010, • Increased standard deductioners due to inflation adjustments, you can make a qualified rollover for real estate taxes or a netyour 2010 standard deduction is contribution to a Roth IRA regard- disaster loss from a disaster At the time this publicationalso increased by: less of the amount of your modified occurring after 2009. went to print, Congress
AGI. was considering legisla-• Any state or local sales or ex-
CAUTION
! • Itemized deduction or in-Also, half of any income that tion that would reinstate many ofcise taxes you paid in 2010 creased standard deductionresults from a rollover or conver- these expired tax benefits. To findon the purchase of a new mo- for state or local sales or ex-sion to a Roth IRA from another out if this legislation was enacted,tor vehicle after February 16, cise taxes on the purchase ofretirement plan in 2010 is included and for more details, go to www.irs.2009, and before January 1, a new motor vehicle (unlessin income in 2011, and the other gov/formspubs.2010, and you bought the vehicle inhalf in 2012, unless you elect to 2009 after February 16 and• Any net disaster loss you had include all of it in 2010. See chap- Mailing your return. If you arepaid the tax in 2010).in 2010 because of a disaster ters 10 and 17. filing a paper return, you may bethat was declared a federal • Deduction for state and local mailing your return to a differentStandard mileage rates. Fordisaster after 2007 and that general sales taxes. address this year because the IRS2010, the standard mileage rate foroccurred before 2010. • The exclusion from income of has changed the filing location forthe cost of operating your car for
up to $2,400 in unemploy- several areas. See the instructionsbusiness use is 50 cents a mile.
You can use the 2010 Standard ment compensation. All un-See chapter 26. for the form you file.Deduction Worksheet in chapter 20 employment compensationFor 2010, the standard mileage
Preparer e-file mandate. A newof this publication to figure your you received in 2010 gener-rate for the cost of operating your
standard deduction. But to in- law requires some paid preparersally is taxable.car for medical reasons is 16 1/2
crease your standard deduction by to e-file returns they prepare andcents a mile. See chapter 21. • The exclusion from income oftaxes paid on the purchase of a For 2010, the standard mileage file. Your preparer may make youqualified charitable distribu-new motor vehicle or a net disaster rate for the cost of operating your aware of this requirement and thetions made from IRA ac-loss, you must use Schedule L car for determining moving ex- options available to you.counts.(Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it penses is 16 1/2 cents a mile. See
to your return. Publication 521, Moving Expenses. • Government retiree credit.
■
Publication 17 (2010) Page 1

Page 4 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- schemes. Phishing is the creation If you reside outside the United other specified frivolous submis-
ers and other items that may help sions. See chapter 1.States, you may be able to excludeand use of email and websites de-
you file your 2010 tax return. Many part or all of your foreign sourcesigned to mimic legitimate busi-
Filing erroneous claim for refundof these items are explained in earned income. For details, seeness emails and websites. The or credit. You may have to pay amore detail later in this publication. Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.most common form is the act of penalty if you file an erroneousCitizens and Resident Alienssending an email to a user falselyEnter your social security num- claim for refund or credit. SeeAbroad.claiming to be an established legiti-ber (SSN). Enter your SSN in the chapter 1.mate enterprise in an attempt tospace provided on your tax form. If Automatic 6-month extension toscam the user into surrendering Privacy Act and paperwork re-you filed a joint return for 2009 and file tax return. You can useprivate information that will be used duction information. The IRSare filing a joint return for 2010 with Form 4868, Application for Auto-for identity theft. Restructuring and Reform Act ofthe same spouse, enter your matic Extension of Time To FileThe IRS does not initiate con- 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, andnames and SSNs in the same order U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,tacts with taxpayers via emails. the Paperwork Reduction Act ofas on your 2009 return. See chap- to obtain an automatic 6-month ex-Also, the IRS does not request de- 1980 require that when we ask youter 1. tension of time to file your tax re-tailed personal information through for information we must first tell youturn. See chapter 1.email or ask taxpayers for the PINSecure your tax records from what our legal right is to ask for the
identity theft. Identity theft oc- numbers, passwords, or similar se- information, why we are asking forInclude your phone number on
curs when someone uses your per- it, how it will be used, what couldcret access information for their your return. To promptly resolve
sonal information such as your happen if we do not receive it, andcredit card, bank, or other financial any questions we have in process-
name, SSN, or other identifying in- whether your response is volun-ing your tax return, we would like toaccounts.
formation, without your permission, tary, required to obtain a benefit, orbe able to call you. Please enterIf you receive an unsolicited
to commit fraud or other crimes. An mandatory under the law. A com-your daytime telephone number onemail claiming to be from the IRS,
identity thief may use your SSN to plete statement on this subject canyour tax form next to your signa-forward the message to: phish-
get a job or may file a tax return be found in your tax form instruc-ture.ing@irs.gov. You may also report
using your SSN to receive a refund. tion booklet.misuse of the IRS name, logo, Payment of taxes. Make yourTo reduce your risk: forms or other IRS property to the Customer service for taxpayers.check or money order payable toTreasury Inspector General for Tax• Protect your SSN, The Internal Revenue Service hasªUnited States Treasury.º You canAdministration toll-free at expanded customer service for tax-pay your taxes by credit or debit• Ensure your employer is pro- 1-800-366-4484. You can forward payers. You can set up a personalcard, using the Electronic Federaltecting your SSN, and suspicious emails to the Federal appointment at the most conve-Tax Payment System (EFTPS), or,Trade Commission at: spam@uce.• Be careful when choosing a nient Taxpayer Assistance Center,if you file electronically, by elec-gov or contact them at www.ftc.tax preparer. on the most convenient businesstronic funds withdrawal. See chap-
gov/idtheft  or 1-877-IDTHEFT day. See How To Get Tax Help  inter 1.
If your tax records are affected (1-877-438-4338). the back of this publication.
by identity theft and you receive a Faster ways to file your return.Visit IRS.gov and enter ªidentity
notice from the IRS, respond right Treasury Inspector General forThe IRS offers fast, accurate waystheftº in the search box to learn
away to the name and phone num- Tax Administration. If you wantto file your tax return informationmore about identity theft and how
ber printed on the IRS notice or to confidentially report misconduct,without filing a paper tax return.to reduce your risk.
letter. waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSYou can use IRS e-file (electronic
Taxpayer identification num-If your tax records are not cur- employee, you can callfiling). See chapter 1.
rently affected by identity theft but bers. You must provide the tax- 1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877-8339
Free electronic filing.  You mayyou think you are at risk due to a for TTY/TDD users). You can re-payer identification number for
be able to file your 2010 taxes on-lost or stolen purse or wallet, ques- main anonymous.each person for whom you claim
line for free thanks to an electronictionable credit card activity or credit certain tax benefits. This applies
Photographs of missing chil-filing agreement. See chapter 1.report, etc., contact the IRS Identity even if the person was born in
dren. The Internal RevenueProtection Specialized Unit at 2010. Generally, this number is the Change of address. If you Service is a proud partner with the1-800-908-4490 or submit Form person's social security number change your address, you should National Center for Missing and14039. (SSN). See chapter 1. notify the IRS. See Change of Ad- Exploited Children. Photographs ofFor more information, see Pub- dress, under What Happens After I missing children selected by theForeign source income. If youlication 4535, Identity Theft Pre- File, in chapter 1. Center may appear in this publica-are a U.S. citizen with income fromvention and Victim Assistance.
tion on pages that would otherwisesources outside the United States Victims of identity theft who are Refund on a late filed return. If be blank. You can help bring these(foreign income), you must reportexperiencing economic harm or a you were due a refund but you did children home by looking at theall such income on your tax returnsystemic problem, or are seeking not file a return, you generally must photographs and callingunless it is exempt by U.S. law.help in resolving tax problems that file your return within 3 years from 1-800-THE-LOSTThis is true whether you reside in-have not been resolved through the date the return was due (includ- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizeside or outside the United Statesnormal channels, may be eligible ing extensions) to get that refund. a child.and whether or not you receive afor Taxpayer Advocate Service See chapter 1.Form W-2 or Form 1099 from the(TAS) assistance. You can reach
foreign payer. This applies toTAS by calling the National Tax- Frivolous tax submissions.
earned income (such as wagespayer Advocate helpline toll-free The IRS has published a list of po-
and tips) as well as unearned in-case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 sitions that are identified as frivo-
come (such as interest, dividends,or TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059. lous. The penalty for filing a
capital gains, pensions, rents andProtect yourself from suspi- frivolous tax return is $5,000. Also,
royalties).cious emails or phishing the $5,000 penalty will apply to ■
Page 2 Publication 17 (2010)

Page 5 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication covers the general explain the standard deduction, the If you operate your own business the area code, in your correspond-
rules for filing a federal income tax ence.or have other self-employment in-kinds of expenses you may be able
return. It supplements the informa- You can email us atcome, such as from babysitting orto deduct, and the various kinds of
tion contained in your tax form in- *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskselling crafts, see the followingcredits you may be able to take to
struction booklet. It explains the tax must be included in the address.)publications for more information.reduce your tax.law to make sure you pay only the Please put ªPublications Com-• Publication 334, Tax GuideThroughout the publication aretax you owe and no more. mentº on the subject line. Althoughfor Small Business (For Indi-examples showing how the tax law we cannot respond individually to
viduals Who Use Schedule C each email, we do appreciate yourapplies in typical situations. Sam-How this publication is ar- or C-EZ). feedback and will consider yourple forms and schedules show youranged. This publication closely
comments as we revise our tax• Publication 535, Business Ex-follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual how to report certain items on your
products.penses.Income Tax Return. It is divided return. Also throughout the publica-
into six parts which cover different tion are flowcharts and tables that Ordering forms and publica-• Publication 587, Businesssections of Form 1040. Each part is tions. Visit www.irs.gov/form-present tax information in an Use of Your Home (Includingfurther divided into chapters which spubs to download forms andeasy-to-understand manner. Use by Daycare Providers).generally discuss one line of the publications, call 1-800-829-3676,Many of the subjects discussedform. Do not worry if you file Form or write to the address below and
in this publication are discussed in1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything Help from the IRS. There are receive a response within 10 days
included on a line of either of these many ways you can get help fromgreater detail in other IRS publica- after your request is received.
forms is also included on Form the IRS. These are explainedtions. References to those other
1040. under How To Get Tax Help in thepublications are provided for your Internal Revenue Serviceback of this publication.information.The table of contents inside the 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayfront cover and the index in the Bloomington, IL 61705-6613Icons. Small graphic symbols, Comments and suggestions.back of the publication are useful or icons, are used to draw your We welcome your comments abouttools to help you find the informa- attention to special information. Tax questions. If you have athis publication and your sugges-tion you need.
See Table 1 below for an explana- tax question, check the informationtions for future editions.
tion of each icon used in this publi- available on IRS.gov or callYou can write to us at the fol-What is in this publication. The 1-800-829-1040. We cannot an-cation. lowing address:publication begins with the rules for swer tax questions sent to either offiling a tax return. It explains: the above addresses.
Internal Revenue ServiceWhat is not covered in this publi-1. Who must file a return, IRS mission. Provide America'sIndividual Forms andcation. Some material that you taxpayers top quality service by2. Which tax form to use, Publications Branchmay find helpful is not included in helping them understand and meetSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I3. When the return is due, this publication but can be found in their tax responsibilities and by ap-1111 Constitution Ave. NW,your tax form instruction booklet. plying the tax law with integrity and4. How to e-file your return, and IR-6526This includes lists of: fairness to all.Washington, DC 202245. Other general information.
• Where to report certain items
It will help you identify which filing shown on information docu- We respond to many letters bystatus you qualify for, whether you ments, and telephone. Therefore, it would becan claim any dependents, and
• Recorded tax information top- helpful if you would include yourwhether the income you receive is
daytime phone number, includingics (TeleTax).taxable. The publication goes on to
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
!
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.
TIP
■
Publication 17 (2010) Page 3

Page 6 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax returnÐsuch as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Alternative payment methods. If you owe Adoption taxpayer identification number. If
additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni- a child has been placed in your home for pur-
cally. See How To Pay, later. poses of legal adoption and you will not be able1. to get a social security number for the child inInstallment agreement. If you cannot pay the time to file your return, you may be able to get anfull amount due with your return, you may ask to adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).make monthly installment payments. See In- For more information, see Social Security Num-Filing stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You ber, later.Owe. You may be able to apply online for a
payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter- Taxpayer identification number for aliens.Information est, and penalties. If you or your dependent is a nonresident or
resident alien who does not have and is notAutomatic 6-month extension. You can get eligible to get a social security number, file Forman automatic 6-month extension to file your taxWhat's New W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayerreturn if, no later than the date your return is due, Identification Number, with the IRS. For moreyou file Form 4868, Application for AutomaticDue date of return. File your 2010 income tax information, see Social Security Number, later.Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In-return by April 18, 2011. The due date is April come Tax Return. See Automatic Extension , Frivolous tax submissions. The IRS has18, instead of April 15, because of the Emanci- later. published a list of positions that are identified aspation Day holiday in the District of Columbia
frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous taxeven if you do not live in the District of Columbia. Service in combat zone. You are allowed ex- return is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty willtra time to take care of your tax matters if you areWho must file. Generally, the amount of in- apply to other specified frivolous submissions.a member of the Armed Forces who served in acome you can receive before you must file a For more information, see Civil Penalties, later.combat zone, or if you served in the combatreturn has been increased. See Table 1-1,  Ta- zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-ble 1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts. viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under
When Do I Have To File.Mailing your return. You may be mailing your
Introductionreturn to a different address this year because
the IRS has changed the filing location for sev- This chapter discusses the following topics.eral areas. See Where Do I File , later in this
chapter.
Table 1-1. 2010 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
THEN file a return if 
AND at the end of 2010 you your gross income 
Reminders IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**
single under 65 $ 9,350Alternative filing methods. Rather than filing
a return on paper, you may be able to file elec- 65 or older $10,750
tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per- married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $18,700sonal identification number (PIN) and file a
completely paperless tax return. For more infor- 65 or older (one spouse) $19,800
mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on
65 or older (both spouses) $20,900Paper, later.
married filing separately any age $ 3,650Change of address. If you change your ad-
dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of head of household under 65 $12,050
Address, later, under What Happens After I File.
65 or older $13,450
Enter your social security number. You qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $15,050must enter your social security number (SSN) in
the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file dependent child 65 or older $16,150
a joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order
* If you were born on January 1, 1946, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2010.as the names. ** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is not
exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale of your mainDirect deposit of refund. Instead of getting a home (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits unless (a) you arepaper check, you may be able to have your married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2010 or (b) one-half of your
refund deposited directly into your account at a social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000
bank or other financial institution. See Direct ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the instructions for Form 1040 or 1040A or
Publication 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income.Deposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di-
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2010 (or on the date your spouse died) and your grossrect deposit of your refund, you may be able to income was at least $3,650, you must file a return regardless of your age.split the refund among two or three accounts.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 7 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Whether you have to file a return. and services that is not exempt from tax. It also • You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.includes income from sources outside the• Which form to use. United States or from the sale of your main • The decedent met the filing requirements• How to file electronically. home (even if you can exclude all or part of it). at the date of death.Include part of your social security benefits if:• When, how, and where to file your return.
For more information on rules for filing a dece-1. You were married, filing a separate return,• What happens if you pay too little or too dent's final return, see Publication 559, Survi-and you lived with your spouse at any timemuch tax. vors, Executors, and Administrators.during 2010; or• What records you should keep and how
2. Half of your social security benefits pluslong you should keep them.
your other gross income and any U.S. Citizens and Residents Living• How you can change a return you have tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 Outside the United Statesalready filed. ($32,000 if married filing jointly).
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outsideIf either (1) or (2) applies, see the instructions for the United States, you must file a return if youForm 1040 or 1040A, or Publication 915, Social meet the filing requirements. For information onSecurity and Equivalent Railroad Retirement special tax rules that may apply to you, seeDo I Have To Benefits, to figure the social security benefits Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens andyou must include in gross income. Resident Aliens Abroad. It is available at mostFile a Return? Common types of income are discussed in U.S. embassies and consulates. Also see How
Part Two of this publication. To Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.You must file a federal income tax return if you
are a citizen or resident of the United States or a Community income. If you are married and
resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing your permanent home is in a community prop-
Residents of Puerto Ricorequirements for any of the following categories erty state, half of any income described by state
that apply to you. law as community income may be considered Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-yours. This affects your federal taxes, including dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income1. Individuals in general. (There are special whether you must file if you do not file a joint tax return if you meet the filing requirements.rules for surviving spouses, executors, ad- return with your spouse. See Publication 555, This is in addition to any legal requirement youministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit- Community Property, for more information. may have to file an income tax return for Puertoizens and residents living outside the
Rico.California, Nevada, and Washington do-United States, residents of Puerto Rico,
and individuals with income from U.S. pos- mestic partners. A registered domestic part- If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the
sessions.) ner in California, Nevada, or Washington must entire year, gross income does not include in-
come from sources within Puerto Rico, exceptreport half the combined community income2. Dependents. for amounts received as an employee of theearned by the individual and his or her domestic
3. Certain children under age 19 or full-time United States or a U.S. agency. If you receivepartner. See Publication 555.
students. income from Puerto Rican sources that is notSelf-employed individuals. If you are subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-4. Self-employed persons. self-employed, your gross income includes the dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),5. Aliens. come you must have before you are required toProfit or Loss From Business; line 1 of Schedule file a U.S. income tax return is lower than theThe filing requirements for each category are C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business; applicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. Forexplained in this chapter. and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or more information, see Publication 570, TaxThe filing requirements apply even if you do Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per- Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S.not owe tax. sons, later, for more information about your filing Possessions.
requirements.Even if you do not have to file a return,
it may be to your advantage to do so. If you do not report all of yourSee Who Should File, later.
TIP Individuals With Income From self-employment income, your social
security benefits may be lower when U.S. Possessions
CAUTION
!File only one federal income tax return you retire.for the year regardless of how many If you had income from Guam, the Common-
jobs you had, how many Forms W-2 wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
CAUTION
!Filing status. Your filing status depends onyou received, or how many states you lived in can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, specialwhether you are single or married and on yourduring the year. Do not file more than one origi- rules may apply when determining whether youfamily situation. Your filing status is determinednal return for the same year, even if you have must file a U.S. federal income tax return. Inon the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-not gotten your refund or have not heard from addition, you may have to file a return with theber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for anthe IRS since you filed. individual island government. See Publicationexplanation of each filing status. 570 for more information.
IndividualsÐIn General Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
Dependentsyear, you generally can have a higher amount ofIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you gross income than other taxpayers before youmust file a return depends on three factors: If you are a dependent (one who meets themust file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 65 dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 toon the day before your 65th birthday. For exam-1. Your gross income, find whether you must file a return. You alsople, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2011, must file if your situation is described in Table2. Your filing status, and you are considered 65 for 2010. 1-3.
3. Your age.
Responsibility of parent. Generally, a childTo find out whether you must file, see Table Surviving Spouses, is responsible for filing his or her own tax return1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no table
and for paying any tax on the return. But if aExecutors, Administrators, shows that you must file, you may need to file to
dependent child who must file an income taxand Legal Representativesget money back. (See Who Should File, later.)
return cannot file it for any reason, such as age,
You must file a final return for a decedent (a then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon-Gross income. This includes all income you
person who died) if both of the following are true. sible person must file it for the child. If the childreceive in the form of money, goods, property,
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 andTable 1-2. 2010 Filing Requirements for Dependents
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-EmploymentSee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. Tax, if:
If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations 1. Your net earnings from self-employmentbelow apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must (excluding church employee income) werefile.) $400 or more, orIn this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It also
includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in 2. You had church employee income of
chapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest, $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.)
ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation,
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure yourtaxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, cancellation of debt, and distributions of
self-employment tax. Self-employment tax isunearned income from a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income.
comparable to the social security and Medicare
tax withheld from an employee's wages. For
Single dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind? more information about this tax, see Publication
334, Tax Guide for Small Business.M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $950. Employees of foreign governments or in-
• Your earned income was more than $5,700. ternational organizations. If you are a U.S.• Your gross income was more than the larger of: citizen who works in the United States for an• $950, or international organization, a foreign govern-• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300. ment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of a
foreign government, and your employer is notM Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
required to withhold social security and Medi-• Your unearned income was more than $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind).
care taxes from your wages, you must include• Your earned income was more than $7,100 ($8,500 if 65 or older and blind).
your earnings from services performed in the• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
United States when figuring your net earnings• $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind), or
from self-employment.• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,700 ($3,100 if 65 or older and blind).
Ministers. You must include income fromMarried dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
services you performed as a minister when fig-M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. uring your net earnings from self-employment,• Your unearned income was more than $950. unless you have an exemption from• Your earned income was more than $5,700. self-employment tax. This also applies to Chris-• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and tian Science practitioners and members of aitemizes deductions. religious order who have not taken a vow of• Your gross income was more than the larger of: poverty. For more information, see Publication• $950, or 517, Social Security and Other Information for• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300. Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and blind). Aliens• Your earned income was more than $6,800 ($7,900 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and Your status as an alienÐresident, nonresident,itemizes deductions. or dual-status Ðdetermines whether and how• Your gross income was more than the larger of: you must file an income tax return.• $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and blind), or The rules used to determine your alien status• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,400 ($2,500 if 65 or older and blind). are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax
Guide for Aliens.
cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian does not have to file a return. See Parent's
Resident alien. If you are a resident alien formust sign the child's name followed by the Election To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-words ªBy (your signature), parent for minor dends in chapter 31.
ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.child.º
Use the forms discussed in this publication.
Self-Employed PersonsChild's earnings. Amounts a child earns by
performing services are his or her gross income. Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresidentYou are self-employed if you:This is true even if under local law the child's alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to youparents have the right to the earnings and may • Carry on a trade or business as a sole are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-actually have received them. If the child does not proprietor, zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 topay the tax due on this income, the parent is find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and• Are an independent contractor,liable for the tax. which forms you should file.
• Are a member of a partnership, or
Certain Children Under Dual-status taxpayer. If you are a resident• Are in business for yourself in any other
alien for part of the tax year and a nonresidentway.Age 19 or Full-Time
alien for the rest of the year, you are aStudents dual-status taxpayer. Different rules apply forSelf-employment can include work in addition
to your regular full-time business activities, such each part of the year. For information onIf a child's only income is interest and dividends as certain part-time work you do at home or in dual-status taxpayers, see Publication 519.(including capital gain distributions and Alaska addition to your regular job. Permanent Fund dividends), the child was under You must file a return if your gross income isage 19 at the end of 2010 or was a full-time Who Should Fileat least as much as the filing requirementstudent under age 24 at the end of 2010, and amount for your filing status and age (shown in Even if you do not have to file, you should file acertain other conditions are met, a parent can
federal income tax return to get money back ifelect to include the child's income on the par-
any of the following conditions apply.ent's return. If this election is made, the child
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2010 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below applies, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table
1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Social security or Medicare tax on wages you received from an employer who did not withhold these taxes.
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in
box 12 of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the Instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment
Credit, or Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the Instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
• Recapture of alternative motor vehicle credit. (See Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit.)
• Recapture of first-time homebuyer credit. 
• Household employment taxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household Employment Taxes.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
1. You had federal income tax withheld or See the discussion under Form 1040 9. You do not owe any household employ-
made estimated tax payments. for when you must use that form. ment taxes on wages you paid to a house-
hold employee.
TIP2. You qualify for the earned income credit.
See chapter 36 for more information. 10. You are not claiming the additional stan-
dard deduction.3. You qualify for the additional child tax
Form 1040EZcredit. See chapter 34 for more informa- You must meet all of these requirements to
tion. use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use. Form 1040A or Form 1040.
4. You qualify for the health coverage tax
credit. See chapter 37 for more informa- You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow- Figuring tax. On Form 1040EZ, you can usetion. ing apply. only the tax table to figure your tax. You cannot
use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.5. You qualify for the refundable credit for 1. Your filing status is single or married filing
prior year minimum tax. jointly. If you were a nonresident alien at
any time in 2010, your filing status must be Form 1040A6. You qualify for the making work pay credit. married filing jointly.See chapter 37 for more information. If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you2. You (and your spouse if married filing a7. You qualify for the first-time homebuyer may be able to use Form 1040A.joint return) were under age 65 and notcredit. See chapter 37 for more informa- blind at the end of 2010. If you were borntion. on January 1, 1946, you are considered to You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-
8. You qualify for the American opportunity be age 65 at the end of 2010. ing apply.
credit. See chapter 35 for more informa- 3. You do not claim any dependents. 1. Your income is only from wages, salaries,tion.
tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-4. Your taxable income is less than9. You qualify for the credit for federal tax on ties, taxable social security and railroad re-$100,000.fuels. See chapter 37 for more information. tirement benefits, taxable scholarship and5. Your income is only from wages, salaries,10. You qualify for the adoption credit. See fellowship grants, interest, ordinary divi-tips, unemployment compensation, Alaskachapter 37 for more information. dends (including Alaska Permanent FundPermanent Fund dividends, taxable schol- dividends), capital gain distributions, andarship and fellowship grants, and taxable unemployment compensation.interest of $1,500 or less.
2. Your taxable income is less than6. You did not receive any advance earned $100,000.income credit (EIC) payments.Which Form 
3. Your adjustments to income are for only
7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- the following items.Should I Use? come, such as a deduction for IRA contri-
butions or student loan interest. a. IRA deduction. You must use one of three forms to file your
b. Student loan interest deduction. return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 8. You do not claim any credits other than the
1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be earned income credit or the making work
4. You do not itemize your deductions. on Paper, later.) pay credit.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. Your taxes are from only the following some adjustments to income, and credits you 16. You must recapture the first-time
items. cannot take on Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. homebuyer credit.
17. You received a refund or credit of certaina. Tax Table. You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow- taxes or net disaster loss you claimed asing apply.b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter part of your standard deduction.
30.) 1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.
c. Advance earned income credit (EIC) 2. You itemize your deductions.payments, if you received any. (See
chapter 36.) 3. You had income that cannot be reported Does My Return Haveon Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, includingd. Recapture of an education credit. (See
tax-exempt interest from private activitychapter 35.) To Be on Paper?bonds issued after August 7, 1986.e. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children
You may be able to file a paperless return usingWho Have Investment Income of More 4. You claim any adjustments to gross in- IRS e-file (electronic filing). If your 2010 ad-Than $1,900. come other than the adjustments listed justed gross income (AGI) is $58,000 or less,earlier under Form 1040A.f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain you are eligible for Free File. If you do not qualify
Tax Worksheet. for Free File, then you should check out IRS.gov5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol-
for low-cost e-file options or Free File Fillablelected employee tax (social security and
6. You claim only the following tax credits. Forms.Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or
group-term life insurance (see chapter 5).a. The credit for child and dependent care
IRS e-fileexpenses. (See chapter 32.) 6. You received $20 or more in tips in any 1
month and did not report all of them tob. The credit for the elderly or the dis-
your employer. (See chapter 6.) Table 1-4 lists the benefitsabled. (See chapter 33.) 
of IRS e-file . IRS e-file7. You were a bona fide resident of Puertoc. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) uses automation to replace most of the manualRico and exclude income from sources in steps needed to process paper returns. As ad. The additional child tax credit. (See Puerto Rico. result, the processing of e-file returns is fasterchapter 34.)
and more accurate than the processing of paper8. You claim any credits other than the cred-e. The education credits. (See chapter returns. However, as with a paper return, youits listed earlier under Form 1040A.35.) are responsible for making sure your return con-
9. You owe the excise tax on insider stock tains accurate information and is filed on time.f. The retirement savings contributions compensation from an expatriated corpo- Using e-file does not affect your chances of ancredit. (See chapter 37.) ration. IRS examination of your return.g. The earned income credit. (See chapter 10. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in box36.) Free File Fillable Forms. If you do not need12 with a code Z.
the help of a tax preparer, then Free File Fillableh. The making work pay credit. (See chap- 11. You had a qualified health savings account Forms may be for you. These forms:ter 37.) funding distribution from your IRA.
• Do not have an income requirement so7. You did not have an alternative minimum 12. You are an employee and your employer everyone is eligible,tax adjustment on stock you acquired from did not withhold social security and Medi-
• Are easy to use,the exercise of an incentive stock option. care tax.
(See Publication 525, Taxable and Nontax- • Perform basic math calculations,13. You have to file other forms with your re-able Income.) turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or • Are available only at IRS.gov, andYou must meet all of the above requirements transactions.
• Apply only to a federal tax return.to use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use
14. You are a debtor in a bankruptcy case filedForm 1040.
after October 16, 2005. Electronic return signatures. To file your re-See Form 1040A for other adjustments
15. You have a net disaster loss attributable to turn electronically, you must sign the return elec-to income that may be allowed.
a federally declared disaster, even if you tronically using a personal identification number
CAUTION
!
are claiming the standard deduction. (PIN). If you are filing online, you must use a
If you meet the above requirements, you can Table 1-4 Benefits of IRS e-file
use Form 1040A even if you received em-
ployer-provided dependent care benefits or
• Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own tax returns for free.claim the additional standard deduction for taxes
paid in 2010 on the purchase in 2009 after Feb- • Free File is available in English and Spanish.
ruary 16 of a new motor vehicle.
• Free File is available online 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
If you receive a capital gain distribution
• Get your refund in as few as 10 days with Direct Deposit.that includes unrecaptured section
1250 gain, section 1202 gain, or col- • Sign electronically with a secure self-selected PIN number and file a completely paperless
CAUTION
!
lectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Form return.
1040A. You must use Form 1040. • Receive an acknowledgement that your return was accepted.
• If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal or pay by credit card.Form 1040 You can also file a return early and pay the amount you owe by the due date of your return.
If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, • Save time by preparing and e-filing federal and state returns together.
you must use Form 1040. You can use Form • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing information.1040 to report all types of income, deductions,
and credits. • Help the environment, use less paper, and save taxpayer money Ðit costs less to process
an e-filed return than a paper return.You may pay less tax by filing Form 1040
because you can take itemized deductions,
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-Select PIN. If you are filing electronically State returns. In most states, you can file an Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-
using a tax practitioner, you can use a gram is designed to help low to moderate in-electronic state return simultaneously with your
Self-Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN. come taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for thefederal return. For more information, check with
Elderly (TCE) program is designed to assist tax-your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-
Self-Select PIN. The Self-Select PIN method payers age 60 or older with their tax returns.fessional, or the IRS website at 
allows you to create your own PIN. If you are Many VITA sites offer free electronic filing andwww.irs.gov/efile.
married filing jointly, you and your spouse will all volunteers will let you know about the credits
each need to create a PIN and enter these PINs and deductions you may be entitled to claim. ToRefunds. You can have a refund check mailed
as your electronic signatures. find a site near you, call 1-800-906-9887. Or toto you, or you can have your refund deposited
find the nearest AARP TaxAide site, visitA PIN is any combination of five digits you directly to your checking or savings account or
AARP's website at www.aarp.org/taxaide or callchoose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there split among two or three accounts. With e-file,
1-888-227-7669. For more information on theseis nothing to sign and nothing to mailÐnot even your refund will be issued faster than if you filed
programs, go to IRS.gov and enter keywordyour Forms W-2. on paper.
ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner.To verify your identity, you will be prompted As with a paper return, you may not get all of
to enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from your refund if you owe certain past-due
your originally filed 2009 federal income tax re- amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu- Using a Tax Professionalturn, if applicable. Do not use your AGI from an dent loan, or child support. See Offset against
amended return (Form 1040X) or a math error debts under Refunds, later. Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-correction made by the IRS. AGI is the amount turns for their clients. You may personally entershown on your 2009 Form 1040, line 38; Form Refund inquiries. You can go online to check your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file1040A, line 22; or Form 1040EZ, line 4. If you do the status of your refund 72 hours after the IRS Signature Authorization, to authorize the taxnot have your 2009 income tax return, you can acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, see professional to enter your PIN on your return.quickly request a transcript by using our auto- Refund Information, later.mated self-service tool. Visit us at IRS.gov and Note. Tax professionals may charge a feeclick on ªOrder a Transcriptº or call Amount you owe. To avoid late-payment for IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on the1-800-908-9946 to get a free transcript of your penalties and interest, pay your taxes in full by professional and the specific services rendered.return. (If you filed electronically last year, you April 18, 2011. You can make your paymentmay use your prior year PIN to verify your iden- electronically by credit or debit card or by sched-tity instead of your prior year AGI. The prior year uling an electronic funds withdrawal from yourPIN is the five digit PIN you used to electroni- checking or savings account. When Do I cally sign your 2009 return.) You will also be See How To Pay , later, for information onprompted to enter your date of birth (DOB). how to pay the amount you owe. Have To File?Make sure your DOB is accurate and matches
the information on record with the Social Secur-
April 18, 2011, is the due date for filing yourity Administration by checking your annual so-
Using Your Personal Computer 2010 income tax return if you use the calendarcial security statement.
year. For a quick view of due dates for filing a
You cannot use the Self-Select PIN return with or without an extension of time to fileYou can file your tax return in a fast,
method if you are a first-time filer under (discussed later), see Table 1-5.easy, and convenient way using your
age 16 at the end of 2010.
CAUTION
! If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on thepersonal computer. A computer with
last day of any month except December, or aInternet access and tax preparation software areIf you cannot locate your prior year AGI 52-53-week year), your income tax return is dueall you need. Best of all, you can e-file from theor prior year PIN use the Electronic by the 15th day of the 4th month after the closecomfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days aFiling PIN Request. This can be found
TIP of your fiscal year.week.at IRS.gov. Click on ªRequest Electronic Filing When the due date for doing any act for taxIRS approved tax preparation software isPINº under ªI Need To.º Or you can call purposesÐfiling a return, paying taxes, etc. Ðavailable for online use on the Internet, for1-866-704-7388. falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, thedownload from the Internet, and in retail stores.
due date is delayed until the next business day.For information, visit www.irs.gov/efile.Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PIN
Filing on time. Your paper return is filed onmethod allows you to authorize your tax practi-
time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properlytioner to enter or generate your PIN. The practi- Through Employers and Financial addressed, has enough postage, and is post-tioner can provide you with details.
Institutions marked by the due date. If you send your return
Form 8453. You must send in a paper Form by registered mail, the date of the registration isSome businesses offer free e-file to their em-8453 if you are attaching or filing Appendix A of the postmark date. The registration is evidenceployees, members, or customers. Others offer itRevenue Procedure 2009-20, Forms 1098-C, that the return was delivered. If you send afor a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-2848 (for an electronic return signed by an return by certified mail and have your receipttion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee,agent), 3115, 3468 (if attachments are re- postmarked by a postal employee, the date onmember, or customer benefit.quired), 4136 (if certificate or statement re- the receipt is the postmark date. The post-
quired), 5713, 8283 (if a statement is required marked certified mail receipt is evidence that the
for Section A or if Section B is completed), 8332 return was delivered.Free Help With Your Return(or certain pages from a decree or agreement Private delivery services. If you use a pri-that went into effect after 1984 and before 2009), Free help in preparing your return is available vate delivery service designated by the IRS to8858, 8864 (if certification or statement re- nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The send your return, the postmark date generally isquired), 8885, Schedule D-1 (Form 1040) (if you
elect not to include your transactions on the
Table 1-5.  When To File Your 2010 Returnelectronic STCGL or LTCGL records).
For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.For more details, visit www.irs.gov/efile and
click on ªIndividual Taxpayers.º
For Certain Taxpayers
For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.Power of attorney. If an agent is signing your
return for you, a power of attorney (POA) must No extension requested April 18, 2011 June 15, 2011be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it
Automatic extension October 17, 2011 October 17, 2011using that form's instructions. See Signatures,
later for more information on POAs.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the date the private delivery service records in decedent's normal tax year. See Publication When you file your return. Enter any pay-
its database or marks on the mailing label. The ment you made related to the extension of time559.
private delivery service can tell you how to get to file on Form 1040, line 68. If you file Form
written proof of this date. 1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment inExtensions of Time To File your total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 10, orThe following are designated private delivery
Form 1040A, line 44. Also enter ªForm 4868ºservices. You may be able to get an extension of time to and the amount paid in the space to the left offile your return. Special rules apply for those who• DHL Express (DHL): Same Day Service. line 10 or line 44.were:
• Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priority • Outside the United States, orOvernight, FedEx Standard Overnight,
Individuals Outside the FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority, • Serving in a combat zone.
and FedEx International First. United States
• United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten-Automatic ExtensionDay Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS sion (until June 15, 2011, if you use the calendar
2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS If you cannot file your 2010 return by the due year) to file your 2010 return and pay any federal
Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- date, you may be able to get an automatic income tax due if:
wide Express. 6-month extension of time to file.
1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and
Example. If your return is due on April 18,Private delivery services cannot deliver 2. On the due date of your return:2011, you will have until October 17, 2011, toitems to P.O. boxes. You must use the file. a. You are living outside the United StatesU.S. Postal Service to mail any item to
CAUTION
!
and Puerto Rico, and your main placean IRS P.O. box address. If you do not pay the tax due by the of business or post of duty is outsideregular due date (generally, April 15), the United States and Puerto Rico, oryou will owe interest. You may also beElectronically filed returns. If you use IRS
CAUTION
!
charged penalties, discussed later.e-file, your return is considered filed on time if b. You are in military or naval service on
the authorized electronic return transmitter post- duty outside the United States and 
marks the transmission by the due date. An Puerto Rico.How to get the automatic extension. You
authorized electronic return transmitter is a par- can get the automatic extension by:
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits However, if you pay the tax due after the
1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), orelectronic tax return information directly to the regular due date (generally, April 15), interest
IRS. will be charged from that date until the date the2. Filing a paper form. tax is paid.The electronic postmark is a record of when
If you served in a combat zone or qualifiedthe authorized electronic return transmitter re- E-file options. There are two ways you can hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for aceived the transmission of your electronically use e-file to get an extension of time to file. longer extension of time to file. See Individualsfiled return on its host system. The date and time Complete Form 4868, Application for Automatic Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rulesin your time zone controls whether your elec- Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- that apply to you.tronically filed return is timely. come Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If you
think you may owe tax when you file your return, Married taxpayers. If you file a joint return,Filing late. If you do not file your return by the use Part II of the form to estimate your balance only one spouse has to qualify for this automaticdue date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not extension. If you and your spouse file separatepenalty and interest. For more information, see also send a paper Form 4868. returns, this automatic extension applies only toPenalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount the spouse who qualifies.E-file using your personal computer or aYou Owe.
tax professional.  You can use a tax softwareIf you were due a refund but you did not file a How to get the extension. To use this auto-package with your personal computer or a taxreturn, you generally must file within 3 years matic extension, you must attach a statement toprofessional to file Form 4868 electronically.from the date the return was due (including ex- your return explaining what situation qualifiedYou will need to provide certain information fromtensions) to get that refund. you for the extension. (See the situations listed
your tax return for 2009. If you wish to make a under (2), earlier.)
payment by electronic funds withdrawal, seeNonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannotElectronic payment options, under How To Pay,alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income tax
file your return within the automatic 2-monthlater in this chapter.withholding, your 2010 U.S. income tax return
extension period, you may be able to get an(Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by: E-file and pay by credit or debit card. You additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6can get an extension by paying part or all of your• April 18, 2011, if you use a calendar year, months. File Form 4868 and check the box onestimate of tax due by using a credit or debitor line 8.card. You can do this by phone or over the• The 15th day of the 4th month after the Internet. You do not file Form 4868. See Elec- No further extension. An extension of moreend of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal tronic payment options, under How To Pay, later than 6 months will generally not be granted.year. in this chapter. However, if you are outside the United States
and meet certain tests, you may be granted aIf you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in- Filing a paper Form 4868. You can get an longer extension. For more information, seecome tax withholding, your return is due by: extension of time to file by filing a paper Form When To File and Pay in Publication 54.
4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form• June 15, 2011, if you use a calendar year,
instructions.or
If you want to make a payment with the form, Individuals Serving in • The 15th day of the 6th month after the make your check or money order payable to the Combat Zoneend of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal ªUnited States Treasury.º Write your SSN, day-year. The deadline for filing your tax return, payingtime phone number, and ª2010 Form 4868º on
See Publication 519 for more filing information. any tax you may owe, and filing a claim foryour check or money order.
refund is automatically extended if you serve in a
When to file. You must request the automaticFiling for a decedent. If you must file a final combat zone. This applies to members of the
extension by the due date for your return. Youincome tax return for a taxpayer who died during Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines
can file your return any time before the 6-monththe year (a decedent), the return is due by the serving aboard vessels under the operational
extension period ends.15th day of the 4th month after the end of the control of the Department of Defense, Red
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cross personnel, accredited correspondents, Table 1-6. Six Steps for Preparing Accounting Periods
and civilians under the direction of the Armed Your Return Most individual tax returns cover a calendarForces in support of the Armed Forces.
yearÐthe 12 months from January 1 through1 Ð Get your records together for incomeCombat zone. For purposes of the automatic December 31. If you do not use a calendar year,and expenses.extension, the term ªcombat zoneº includes the your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regularfollowing areas. 2 Ð Get the forms, schedules, and fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the
publications you need. last day of any month except December. A1. The Persian Gulf area, effective January
52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 5317, 1991. 3 Ð Fill in your return. weeks and always ends on the same day of the
2. The qualified hazardous duty area of the 4 Ð Check your return to make sure it is week.
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/ correct. You choose your accounting period (tax
Montenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea, year) when you file your first income tax return. It5 Ð Sign and date your return.and the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral- cannot be longer than 12 months.
lel, effective March 24, 1999. 6 Ð Attach all required forms and
More information. For more information onschedules.3. Afghanistan, effective September 19, accounting periods, including how to change2001. your accounting period, see Publication 538,
Accounting Periods and Methods.See Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax
Substitute tax forms. You cannot use yourGuide, for information about other tax benefits
available to military personnel serving in a com- own version of a tax form unless it meets the
Accounting Methodsbat zone. requirements explained in Publication 1167,
General Rules and Specifications for SubstituteExtension period. The deadline for filing your Your accounting method is the way you accountForms and Schedules.return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim for for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers
refund is extended for at least 180 days after the use either the cash method or an accrual
later of: method. You choose a method when you fileForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should
your first income tax return. If you want toreceive Form W-2 from your employer. You will1. The last day you are in a combat zone or change your accounting method after that, youneed the information from this form to preparethe last day the area qualifies as a combat generally must get IRS approval.your return. See Form W-2  under Credit forzone, or
Withholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4. Cash method. If you use this method, report2. The last day of any continuous qualified Your employer is required to provide or send all items of income in the year in which youhospitalization for injury from service in the actually or constructively receive them. Gener-Form W-2 to you no later than January 31, 2011.combat zone. ally, you deduct all expenses in the year youIf it is mailed, you should allow adequate time to
In addition to the 180 days, your deadline is actually pay them. This is the method most indi-receive it before contacting your employer. If
also extended by the number of days you had vidual taxpayers use.you still do not get the form by February 15, theleft to take action with the IRS when you entered IRS can help you by requesting the form from Constructive receipt. Generally, you con-the combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2
your employer. When you request IRS help, be structively receive income when it is credited tomonths (January 1 ± April 15) to file your tax prepared to provide the following information. your account or set apart in any way that makesreturn. Any days left in this period when you it available to you. You do not need to haveentered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2 • Your name, address (including ZIP code), physical possession of it. For example, interestmonths if you entered it before the beginning of and phone number. credited to your bank account on December 31,the year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten- • Your SSN. 2010, is taxable income to you in 2010 if yousion of Deadlines in Publication 3 for more infor- could have withdrawn it in 2010 (even if themation. • Your dates of employment. amount is not entered in your passbook or with-The above rules on the extension for filing • Your employer's name, address (including drawn until 2011).your return also apply when you are deployed ZIP code), and phone number.outside the United States (away from your per- Garnisheed wages. If your employer uses
manent duty station) while participating in a des- your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages
ignated contingency operation. Form 1099. If you received certain types of are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is
constructively received by you. You must in-income, you may receive a Form 1099. For
clude these wages in income for the year youexample, if you received taxable interest of $10
would have received them.or more, the payer is required to provide or send
How Do I Prepare Form 1099 to you no later than January 31, 2011 Debts paid for you. If another person
(or by February 15, 2011, if furnished by a bro- cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or
My Return? ker). If it is mailed, you should allow adequate loan), you have constructively received the
time to receive it before contacting the payer. If amount and generally must include it in your
This section explains how to get ready to fill in gross income for the year. See Canceled Debtsyou still do not get the form by February 15 (or by
your tax return and when to report your income in chapter 12 for more information.March 3, 2011, if furnished by a broker), call theand expenses. It also explains how to complete IRS for help. Payment to third party. If a third party iscertain sections of the form. You may find Table
paid income from property you own, you have1-6 helpful when you prepare your return.
constructively received the income. It is theWhen Do I Report My 
same as if you had actually received the incomeIncome and Expenses? and paid it to the third party.
Payment to an agent. Income an agent re-You must figure your taxable income on the
ceives for you is income you constructively re-basis of a tax year. A ªtax yearº is an annual
ceived in the year the agent receives it. If youaccounting period used for keeping records and
indicate in a contract that your income is to bereporting income and expenses. You must ac-
paid to another person, you must include thecount for your income and expenses in a way
amount in your gross income when the otherthat clearly shows your taxable income. The way
person receives it.you do this is called an accounting method. This
section explains which accounting periods and Check received or available. A valid check
methods you can use. that was made available to you before the end of
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tax year is constructively received by you in 1040 or 1040A) and attach a copy of the child's also applies to an alien spouse or dependent. To
that year. A check that was ªmade available to birth certificate, death certificate, or hospital rec- apply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. It
youº includes a check you have already re- ords. usually takes about 6 weeks to get an ITIN.
ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in- Enter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an
No social security number. File Form SS-5,cludes, for example, your last paycheck of the SSN is requested.
Application for a Social Security Card, with youryear that your employer made available for you If you are applying for an ITIN for your-local SSA office to get an SSN for yourself orto pick up at the office before the end of the year. self, your spouse, or a dependent inyour dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeksIt is constructively received by you in that year order to file your tax return, attach yourto get an SSN. If you or your dependent is not
TIPwhether or not you pick it up before the end of completed tax return to your Form W-7. See theeligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayerthe year or wait to receive it by mail after the end Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file.identification number (ITIN), later.of the year.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you An ITIN is for tax use only. It does notNo constructive receipt. There may be must show proof of age, identity, and citizenship entitle you or your dependent to socialfacts to show that you did not constructively or alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12 security benefits or change the em-
CAUTION
!receive income. or older and have never been assigned an SSN, ployment or immigration status of either of youyou must appear in person with this proof at an under U.S. law.Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreed SSA office.
to her school board's condition that, in her ab- Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on Penalty for not providing social securitysence, she would receive only the difference the Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by number. If you do not include your SSN or thebetween her regular salary and the salary of a calling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques- SSN of your spouse or dependent as required,substitute teacher hired by the school board. tions about which documents you can use as you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-Therefore, Alice did not constructively receive proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your sion on Penalties, later, for more information.the amount by which her salary was reduced to SSA office.
pay the substitute teacher. If your dependent does not have an SSN by SSN on correspondence. If you write to the
the time your return is due, you may want to ask IRS about your tax account, be sure to includeAccrual method. If you use an accrual for an extension of time to file, as explained your SSN (and the name and SSN of yourmethod, you generally report income when you earlier under When Do I Have To File. spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-earn it, rather than when you receive it. You If you do not provide a required SSN or if you spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-generally deduct your expenses when you incur provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- tify your account, this helps the IRS respond tothem, rather than when you pay them. creased and any refund may be reduced. your correspondence promptly.
Income paid in advance. An advance pay-
Adoption taxpayer identification numberment of income is generally included in gross Presidential Election (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting aincome in the year you receive it. Your method
child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannotof accounting does not matter as long as the Campaign Fund
get an SSN for the child until the adoption isincome is available to you. An advance payment
final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of This fund helps pay for Presidential electionmay include rent or interest you receive in ad-
an SSN. campaigns. The fund reduces candidates' de-vance and pay for services you will perform
File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer pendence on large contributions from individu-later.
Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- als and groups and places candidates on anA limited deferral until the next tax year may
tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the equal financial footing in the general election. Ifbe allowed for certain advance payments. See
following are true. you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. IfPublication 538 for specific information.
you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also• You have a child living with you who wasAdditional information. For more information have $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, yourplaced in your home for legal adoption.on accounting methods, including how to tax or refund will not change.change your accounting method, see Publica- • You cannot get the child's existing SSN
tion 538. even though you have made a reasonable Computationsattempt to get it from the birth parents, the
placement agency, and other persons.Social Security Number The following information on entering numbers
on your tax return may be useful in making the• You cannot get an SSN for the child fromYou must enter your social security number return easier to complete.the SSA because, for example, the adop-(SSN) in the space provided on your return. Be tion is not final.sure the SSN on your return is the same as the Rounding off dollars. You may round off
• You are eligible to claim the child as aSSN on your social security card. If you are cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-
dependent on your tax return.married, enter the SSNs for both you and your ules. If you do round to whole dollars, you must
spouse, whether you file jointly or separately. round all amounts. To round, drop amountsAfter the adoption is final, you must apply for anIf you are filing a joint return, write the SSNs under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 toSSN for the child. You cannot continue using thein the same order as the names. Use this same 99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39ATIN.order in submitting other forms and documents becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.
See Form W-7A for more information.to the IRS. If you have to add two or more amounts to
figure the amount to enter on a line, includeName change. If you changed your name be- Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is cents when adding the amounts and round offcause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re- a nonresident alien, your spouse must have only the total.port the change to your local Social Security either an SSN or an ITIN if:
Administration (SSA) office before filing your Example. You receive two Forms W-2: one• You file a joint return,return. This prevents delays in processing your showing wages of $5,000.55 and one showingreturn and issuing refunds. It also safeguards • You file a separate return and claim an wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youyour future social security benefits. exemption for your spouse, or would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =
$23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).Dependent's social security number. You • Your spouse is filing a separate return.
must provide the SSN of each dependent you If your spouse is not eligible for an SSN, see the Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter theclaim, regardless of the dependent's age. This next discussion. smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enterrequirement applies to all dependents (not just that amount.your children) claimed on your tax return. Individual taxpayer identification number
Exception. If your child was born and died (ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.
in 2010 and you do not have an SSN for the a nonresident or resident alien and you do not Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.
child, enter ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c (Form have and are not eligible to get an SSN. This Enter $500 on line 5.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Negative amounts. If you need to enter a c. Receive copies of notices or transcripts Child's return. If a child has to file a tax return
negative amount, put the amount in parentheses related to your return, upon request, but cannot sign the return, the child's parent,
rather than using a minus sign. To combine and guardian, or another legally responsible person
positive and negative amounts, add all the posi- must sign the child's name, followed by thed. Respond to certain IRS notices abouttive amounts together and then subtract the words ªBy (your signature), parent for minormath errors, offsets (see Refunds,negative amounts. child.ºlater), and return preparation.
Attachments The authorization will automatically end no Paid Preparer
later than the due date (without any extensions)
Depending on the form you file and the items Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist infor filing your 2011 tax return. This is April 17,
reported on your return, you may have to com- preparing, or review your tax return must sign it2012, for most people.
plete additional schedules and forms and attach and fill in the other blanks, including theirSee your form instructions for more informa-
them to your return. Preparer Tax Identification Number (PTIN), intion.
the paid preparer's area of your return.You may be able to file a paperless
A paid preparer can sign the return manuallyreturn using IRS e-file. There's nothing Signatures or use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, orto sign, attach, or mail, not even your
TIP
computer software program. The preparer isYou must sign and date your return. If you file aForms W-2.
personally responsible for affixing his or her sig-joint return, both you and your spouse must sign
nature to the return.the return, even if only one of you had income.Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from your
If the preparer is self-employed (that is, notemployer of wages and other compensation If you file a joint return, both spouses employed by any person or business to preparepaid to you and taxes withheld from your pay. are generally liable for the tax, and the the return), he or she should check theYou should have a Form W-2 from each em- entire tax liability may be assessed
CAUTION
! self-employed box in the Paid Preparer Useployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 in against either spouse. See chapter 2. Only space on the return.the place indicated on the front page of your
return. Attach it only to the front page of your The preparer must give you a copy of yourIf you e-file your return, you can use an
return, not to any attachments. For more infor- return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.electronic signature to sign your return.
mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4. See Does My Return Have To Be on If you prepare your own return, leave this
TIP
If you received a Form 1099-R, Distributions Paper, earlier. area blank. If another person prepares your re-
From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or turn and does not charge you, that personIf you are due a refund, it cannot be issuedProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- should not sign your return.unless you have signed your return.tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with- Enter your occupation in the space provided If you have questions about whether aheld, attach a copy of that form in the place in the signature section. If you file a joint return, preparer must sign your return, contact any IRSindicated on the front page of your return. enter both your occupation and your spouse's office.
occupation. Entering your daytime phone num-Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched- ber may help speed the processing of your re-ules to file with Form 1040EZ. Refundsturn.
Form 1040A. Attach any forms and schedules When you complete your return, you will deter-When someone can sign for you. You canbehind Form 1040A in order of the ªAttachment mine if you paid more income tax than youappoint an agent to sign your return if you are:Sequence Numberº shown in the upper right owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount
corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Form1. Unable to sign the return because of dis-other statements or attachments in the same 1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of theease or injury,order as the forms and schedules they relate to overpayment to your next year's (2011) esti-2. Absent from the United States for a contin-and attach them last. Do not attach items unless mated tax. You cannot have your overpaymentuous period of at least 60 days before therequired to do so. applied to your 2011 estimated tax if you filedue date for filing your return, or Form 1040EZ.Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules 3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of- If you choose to have a 2010 overpay-behind Form 1040 in order of the ªAttachment fice in your area. ment applied to your 2011 estimatedSequence Numberº shown in the upper right
tax, you cannot change your mind andcorner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all
CAUTION
! Power of attorney. A return signed by an have any of it refunded to you after the due dateother statements or attachments in the same agent in any of these cases must have a power (without extensions) of your 2010 return.order as the forms and schedules they relate to of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes theand attach them last. Do not attach items unless Follow the form instructions to complete theagent to sign for you. You can use a POA thatrequired to do so. entries to claim your refund and/or to apply yourstates that the agent is granted authority to sign overpayment to your 2011 estimated tax.the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of
Third Party Designee Attorney and Declaration of Representative. If your refund for 2010 is large, you
Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is may want to decrease the amount ofYou can authorize the IRS to discuss your return granted authority to sign the return. income tax withheld from your pay in
TIPwith your preparer, a friend, family member, or 2011. See chapter 4 for more information.Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentallyany other person you choose. If you check the
incompetent and cannot sign the return, it mustªYesº box in the Third party designee  area of Instead of getting a pa-be signed by a court-appointed representativeyour 2010 tax return and provide the information
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT per check, you may bewho can act for the taxpayer.required, you are authorizing: able to have your refund deposited directly intoIf the taxpayer is mentally competent but your checking or savings account, including anphysically unable to sign the return or POA, a1. The IRS to call the designee to answer any individual retirement arrangement. Follow thevalid ªsignatureº is defined under state law. Itquestions that arise during the processing form instructions to request direct deposit.can be anything that clearly indicates the tax-of your return, and If the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRSpayer's intent to sign. For example, the tax-2. The designee to will send a check instead.payer's ªXº with the signatures of two witnesses
might be considered a valid signature under aa. Give information that is missing from TreasuryDirect . You can request a depositstate's law.your return to the IRS, of your refund to a TreasuryDirect   online ac-
count to buy U.S. Treasury marketable securi-b. Call the IRS for information about the Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is una-
ties and savings bonds. For more information,processing of your return or the status ble to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint
go to www.treasurydirect.gov.of your refund or payments, return in chapter 2.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Split refunds. If you choose direct deposit, Note. If the injured spouse's residence was Check or money order. If you pay by check or
money order, make it out to the ªUnited Statesin a community property state at any time duringyou may be able to split the refund and have it
Treasury.º Show your correct name, address,the tax year, then the injured spouse must onlydeposited among two or three accounts or you
SSN, daytime phone number, and the tax yearmeet (1) above.can use it to buy up to $5,000 in paper series I
and form number on the front of your check orsavings bonds. Complete Form 8888, Allocation If you have not filed your joint return and you money order. If you are filing a joint return, enterknow that your joint refund will be offset, fileof Refund (Including Savings Bond Purchases), the SSN shown first on your tax return. Form 8379 with your return. You should receiveand attach it to your return. For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2010your refund within 14 weeks from the date the and you owe additional tax, show your name,paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the address, SSN, daytime phone number, andOverpayment less than one dollar. If your date the return is filed electronically. ª2010 Form 1040º on the front of your check oroverpayment is less than one dollar, you will not If you filed your joint return and your joint money order. If you file an amended returnget a refund unless you ask for it in writing. refund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When (Form 1040X) for 2009 and you owe tax, show
filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to your name, address, SSN, daytime phone num-
receive your refund. Do not attach the previously ber, and ª2009 Form 1040Xº on the front of yourCashing your refund check. Cash your tax
filed tax return, but do include copies of all check or money order. refund check soon after you receive it. Checks
Forms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any Enclose your payment with your return, butnot cashed within 12 months of the date they are Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The do not attach it to the form. If you filed Form 1040issued will be canceled and the proceeds re- processing of Form 8379 may be delayed if or Form 1040A, complete Form 1040-V, Pay-turned to the IRS. these forms are not attached, or if the form is ment Voucher, and enclose it with your payment
If your check has been canceled, you can incomplete when filed. and return. Although you do not have to use
apply to the IRS to have it reissued. Form 1040-V, doing so allows us to processA separate Form 8379 must be filed for each
your payment more accurately and efficiently.tax year to be considered.
Follow the instructions that come with the form.
Refund more or less than expected. If you An injured spouse claim is different Do not mail cash with your return. If you payfrom an innocent spouse relief request.receive a check for a refund you are not entitled cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part ofAn injured spouse uses Form 8379 toto, or for an overpayment that should have been
CAUTION
! your records.request the division of the tax overpayment at-credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check. Payment not honored. If your check,tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouseCall the IRS. money order, or any other commercial instru-uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse
If you receive a check for more than the ment for payment is not honored by your bankRelief, to request relief from joint liability for tax,
(or other financial institution) and the IRS doesrefund you claimed, do not cash the check until interest, and penalties on a joint return for items
not receive the funds, you still owe the tax. Inyou receive a notice explaining the difference. of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were
addition, you may be subject to a dishonoredincorrectly reported on the joint return. For infor-If your refund check is for less than you payment penalty.mation on innocent spouses, see Relief fromclaimed, it should be accompanied by a notice
joint responsibility under Filing a Joint Return inexplaining the difference. Cashing the check Electronic payment options. Electronic pay-chapter 2.does not stop you from claiming an additional ment options are convenient, safe, and secure
amount of refund. methods for paying individual income taxes.
There's no check to write, money order to buy,Amount You OweIf you did not receive a notice and you have or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24any questions about the amount of your refund, hours a day, 7 days a week.When you complete your return, you will deter-you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that Credit or debit card. For information onreceived a notice, call the IRS. you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should paying your taxes with a credit or debit card, gopay it with your return. to www.irs.gov/e-pay.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, you willOffset against debts. If you are due a refund Electronic funds withdrawal. You canreceive a bill for any tax that is due. You shouldbut have not paid certain amounts you owe, all e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing anpay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date ofor part of your refund may be used to pay all or electronic funds withdrawal from your checkingyour return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS inpart of the past-due amount. This includes or savings account. If you select this paymentchapter 30.past-due federal income tax, other federal debts option, you will need to have your account num-
ber, your financial institution's routing transit(such as student loans), state income tax, and If you do not pay your tax when due,
number, and account type (checking or sav-you may have to pay a failure-to-paychild and spousal support payments. You will be
ings). You can schedule the payment for anypenalty. See Penalties, later. For morenotified if the refund you claimed has been offset
CAUTION
!
future date up to and including the return dueinformation about your balance due, see Publi-against your debts. date.cation 594, The IRS Collection Process.
Joint return and injured spouse. When a Be sure to check with your financialIf the amount you owe for 2010 is large,joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a institution to make sure that an elec-you may want to increase the amountpast-due amount, the other spouse can be con- tronic funds withdrawal is allowed and
CAUTION
!of income tax withheld from your pay or
TIPsidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse to get the correct routing and account numbers.make estimated tax payments for 2011. Seeshould file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca- chapter 4 for more information. Electronic Federal Tax Payment Systemtion, if both of the following apply and the spouse
(EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment systemwants a refund of his or her share of the over-
that all individual and business taxpayers canpayment shown on the joint return. use. You can make payments online or byHow To Pay
phone.1. You are not legally obligated to pay the If you have an amount due on your tax return, Here are just a few of the benefits of thispast-due amount. you can pay by check, money order, credit or easy-to-use system.debit card. If you filed electronically, you also2. You made and reported tax payments • Convenient and flexible. You can use it tomay be able to make your payment electroni-(such as federal income tax withheld from schedule payments in advance. For exam-cally.your wages or estimated tax payments), or ple, you can schedule estimated tax pay-
You do not have to pay if the amountclaimed a refundable tax credit (see the ments (Form 1040-ES) or installment
you owe is less than $1.credits listed under Who Should File, ear- agreement payments weekly, monthly, or
lier).
TIP quarterly.
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Fast and accurate. You can make a tax  For more information, go to IRS.gov, use theInstallment Agreement
payment in minutes. Because there are pull-down menu under ªI need to...º and select
If you cannot pay the full amount due with yourverification steps along the way, you can ªSet Up a Payment Plan.º If you just want to go
return, you can ask to make monthly installmentcheck and review your information before to the OPA application, click on it under the
payments for the full or a partial amount. How-sending it. section on Online Services.
ever, you will be charged interest and may be• Safe and secure. It offers the highest charged a late payment penalty on the tax not Gift To Reduce Debt available levels of security. Every transac- paid by the date your return is due, even if yourtion receives an immediate confirmation. request to pay in installments is granted. If your Held by the Public
request is granted, you must also pay a fee. ToFor more information or details on enrolling, limit the interest and penalty charges, pay as You can make a contribution (gift) tovisit www.irs.gov/e-pay or www.eftps.gov or call much of the tax as possible with your return. But reduce debt held by the public. If youEFTPS Customer Service at 1-800-316-6541 before requesting an installment agreement, wish to do so, make a separate check(individual) or 1-800-555-4477 (business). TTY/
 you should consider other less costly alterna- payable to ªBureau of the Public Debt.ºTDD help is available by calling tives, such as a bank loan. Send your check to:1-800-733-4829. To ask for an installment agreement, use
Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request.Estimated tax payments. Do not include any
You should receive a response to your request2011 estimated tax payment in the payment for Bureau of the Public Debtwithin 30 days. But if you file your return afteryour 2010 income tax return. See chapter 4 for ATTN: Department GMarch 31, it may take longer for a reply. information on how to pay estimated tax. P.O. Box 2188In addition to paying by check or money Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188.order, you can use a credit or debit card or
EFTPS to make installment agreement pay-Interest
Or, enclose your separate check in thements. See How To Pay, earlier.
envelope with your income tax return. Do notInterest is charged on tax you do not pay by the
Guaranteed availability of installment agree- add this gift to any tax you owe. due date of your return. Interest is charged even
ment. The IRS must agree to accept the fullif you get an extension of time for filing. You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-payment of your tax liability in installments if, as tribution on next year's tax return if you itemizeIf the IRS figures your tax for you, inter- of the date you offer to enter into the agreement: your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).est cannot start earlier than the 31st
1. Your total taxes (not counting interest,day after the IRS sends you a bill. For
TIP
penalties, additions to the tax, or additionalinformation, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter Name and Address
amounts) do not exceed $10,000,30.
After you have completed your return, fill-in your2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse ifInterest on penalties. Interest is charged on name and address in the appropriate area of thethe liability relates to a joint return) havethe failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-related Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ.not:penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date
You must write your SSN in the spacesof the return (including extensions) to the date of a. Failed to file any required income tax provided on your tax return.payment. Interest on other penalties starts on return,the date of notice and demand, but is not
CAUTION
!
b. Failed to pay any tax shown on anycharged on penalties paid within 21 calendar
such return, ordays from the date of the notice (or within 10
business days if the notice is for $100,000 or P.O. box. If your post office does not deliverc. Entered into an installment agreementmore). mail to your street address and you have a P.O.for the payment of any income tax,
box, print your P.O. box number on the line forInterest due to IRS error or delay. All or part
your present home address instead of your3. You show you cannot pay your income taxof any interest you were charged can be forgiven
street address.in full when due,if the interest is due to an unreasonable error or
delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in 4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years or Foreign address. If your address is outsideperforming a ministerial or managerial act. less, and the United States or its possessions or territo-A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani- ries, enter the information on the line for ªCity,5. You agree to comply with the tax lawscal act that occurs during the processing of your town or post office, state, and ZIP codeº in thewhile your agreement is in effect.case. A managerial act includes personnel following order:transfers and extended personnel training. A
decision concerning the proper application of Online payment agreement (OPA) applica- 1. City,federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerial tion. You may be able to apply online for a
2. Province or state, andact. payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-
The interest can be forgiven only if you are est, and penalties. If you have received a bal- 3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi-not responsible in any important way for the ance due notice from the IRS and you cannot ate the name of the country.)error or delay and the IRS has notified you in pay in full, you may request a payment agree-
Follow the country's practice for entering thewriting of the deficiency or payment. For more ment. The OPA application allows you, or your
postal code.information, see Publication 556, Examination authorized representative, to self-qualify for and
of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re- apply for a payment agreement, receive notifica-
fund. tion of approval, and arrange a payment sched-
Interest and certain penalties may also be ule.
suspended for a limited period if you filed your To use the OPA application, you must have Where Do I File?
return by the due date (including extensions) filed all required tax returns. You should also
and the IRS does not provide you with a notice have the following information available: After you complete your return, you must send it
specifically stating your liability and the basis for to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to• Balance due notice from the IRS.it before the close of the 36-month period begin- file it electronically. See Does My Return Have
• Social security number or individual tax-ning on the later of: To Be on Paper, earlier.
payer identification number.• The date the return is filed, or Mailing your return. Mail your return to the• Personal identification number, which can• The due date of the return without regard address shown in your instructions.be established online using the caller iden-to extensions. tification number from the balance due no-
For more information, see Publication 556. tice.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 calen- 2. The refund is more than $50,000.
What Happens After dar days to process your request. For example, if you claimed a refund of $100
If your main home, principal place of on your return, but the IRS made an error andI File?
business, or tax records are located in sent you $1,000, you would not be charged
a federally declared disaster area, the interest for the time you held the $900 differ-After you send your return to the IRS, you may
TIP
charge will be waived. ence. You must, however, repay the $900 whenhave some questions. This section discusses
the IRS asks.concerns you may have about recordkeeping,
Transcript of tax return. If you just need in-your refund, and what to do if you move.
formation from your return, you can quickly re- Change of Address
quest transcripts by using our automatedWhat Records Should self-service tools. Visit us at IRS.gov and click If you have moved, file your return using your
I Keep? on ªOrder a Transcriptº or call 1-800-908-9946. new address.
You can also use Form 4506-T, Request for If you move after you filed your return, you
Transcript of Tax Return, or Form 4506T-EZ, should give the IRS clear and concise notifica-You must keep records so that you can Short Form Request for Transcript of Tax Re- tion of your change of address. The notificationprepare a complete and accurate in- turn. There is no fee for a transcript. may be written, electronic, or oral. Send writtencome tax return. The law does not re-
RECORDS
notification to the Internal Revenue Servicequire any special form of records. However, you More information. For more information on Center serving your old address. You can useshould keep all receipts, canceled checks or recordkeeping, see Publication 552, Record- Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-other proof of payment, and any other records to keeping for Individuals. pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-support any deductions or credits you claim.
ing your old address. This will help in forwardingIf you file a claim for refund, you must be able your check to your new address (unless youRefund Informationto prove by your records that you have overpaid chose direct deposit of your refund). For moreyour tax. information, see Revenue Procedure 2010-16,You can go online to check the status of your
2010-19 I.R.B. 664, available at www.irs.gov/irb/2010 refund 72 hours after IRS acknowledgesHow long to keep records. You must keep
2010-19_IRB/ar07.html.receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeksyour records for as long as they are important for
Be sure to include your SSN (and the nameafter you mail a paper return. If you filed Formthe federal tax law.
and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a joint8379 with your return, allow 14 weeks (11 weeksKeep records that support an item of income
return) in any correspondence with the IRS.if you filed electronically) before checking youror a deduction appearing on a return until the
refund status. Be sure to have a copy of yourperiod of limitations for the return runs out. (A
2010 tax return available because you will needperiod of limitations is the period of time after
to know the filing status, the first SSN shown onwhich no legal action can be brought.) For as-
the return, and the exact whole-dollar amount ofsessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3 What If I Made
the refund. To check on your refund, do one ofyears from the date you filed the return. For filing
the following.a claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3 a Mistake?
years from the date you filed the original return, • Go to IRS.gov, and click on ªWhere's My
or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which- Errors may delay your refund or result in noticesRefund.º
ever is later. Returns filed before the due date being sent to you. If you discover an error, you
• Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7are treated as filed on the due date. can file an amended return or claim for refund.
days a week for automated refund infor-If you did not report income that you should
mation.have reported on your return, and it is more than Amended Returns and 25% of the income shown on the return, the • Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours
Claims for Refundperiod of limitations does not run out until 6 shown in your form instructions.
years after you filed the return. If a return is false
You should correct your return if, after you haveor fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no
filed it, you find that:return is filed, an action can generally be brought Interest on Refunds
at any time. 1. You did not report some income,You may need to keep records relating to the If you are due a refund, you may get interest on
basis of property longer than the period of limita- it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly. 2. You claimed deductions or credits you
tions. Keep those records as long as they are should not have claimed,If the refund is made within 45 days after the
important in figuring the basis of the original or due date of your return, no interest will be paid. If 3. You did not claim deductions or credits youreplacement property. Generally, this means for you file your return after the due date (including could have claimed, oras long as you own the property and, after you extensions), no interest will be paid if the refund
dispose of it, for the period of limitations that 4. You should have claimed a different filingis made within 45 days after the date you filed. If
applies to you. See chapter 13 for information on status. (Once you file a joint return, youthe refund is not made within this 45-day period,
basis. cannot choose to file separate returns forinterest will be paid from the due date of the
that year after the due date of the return.return or from the date you filed, whichever is
Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy However, an executor may be able tolater. 
C until you begin receiving social security bene- make this change for a deceased spouse.)Accepting a refund check does not change
fits. This will help protect your benefits in case your right to claim an additional refund and inter- If you need a copy of your return, see Copies ofthere is a question about your work record or est. File your claim within the period of time that returns under What Records Should I Keep ,earnings in a particular year. Review the infor- applies. See Amended Returns and Claims for earlier in this chapter.mation shown on your annual (for workers over Refund, later. If you do not accept a refund
age 25) Social Security Statement. check, no more interest will be paid on the over- Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended
payment included in the check. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct aCopies of returns. You should keep copies of return you have already filed. An amended taxtax returns you have filed and the tax forms Interest on erroneous refund. All or part of return cannot be filed electronically under thepackage as part of your records. They may be any interest you were charged on an erroneous e-file system.helpful in amending filed returns or preparing refund generally will be forgiven. Any interest
future ones. Completing Form 1040X. On Form 1040X,charged for the period before demand for repay-
If you need a copy of a prior year tax return, enter your income, deductions, and credits asment was made will be forgiven unless:
you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506, you originally reported them on your return, the
Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is a 1. You, or a person related to you, caused changes you are making, and the corrected
charge for a copy of a return, which you must the erroneous refund in any way, or amounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of taxable income and the amount you Generally, the IRS will delay action on the treated as financially disabled during any period
protective claim until the contingency is re- your spouse or any other person is authorized toowe or your refund.
solved. act on your behalf in financial matters.If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form
To claim that you are financially disabled,1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from Limit on amount of refund. If you file your you must send in the following written state-any amount you had credited to your estimated claim within 3 years after the date you filed your ments with your claim for refund.tax. return, the credit or refund cannot be more thanIf you cannot pay the full amount due with 1. A statement from your qualified physicianthe part of the tax paid within the 3-year periodyour return, you can ask to make monthly install- that includes:(plus any extension of time for filing your return)ment payments. See Installment Agreement , immediately before you filed the claim. This timeearlier. a. The name and a description of yourperiod is suspended while you are financially physical or mental impairment,If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part of disabled, discussed later.
the overpayment refunded to you, or you can b. The physician's medical opinion that theTax paid. Payments, including estimatedapply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you impairment prevented you from manag-tax payments, made before the due date (with-choose to get a refund, it will be sent separately ing your financial affairs,out regard to extensions) of the original returnfrom any refund shown on your original return.
are considered paid on the due date. For exam- c. The physician's medical opinion that theFiling Form 1040X. After you finish your ple, income tax withheld during the year is con- impairment was or can be expected toForm 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com- sidered paid on the due date of the return, April result in death, or that its duration hasplete. Do not forget to show the year of your 15 for most taxpayers. lasted, or can be expected to last, atoriginal return and explain all changes you least 12 months,made. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules Example 1. You made estimated tax pay- d. The specific time period (to the best ofneeded to explain your changes. Mail your Form ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of the physician's knowledge), and1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Center time to October 15, 2008, to file your 2007 in-
serving the area where you now live (as shown come tax return. When you filed your return on e. The following certification signed by the
in the instructions to the form). However, if you that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On physician: ªI hereby certify that, to the
are filing Form 1040X in response to a notice October 17, 2011, you filed an amended return best of my knowledge and belief, the
you received from the IRS, mail it to the address and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed above representations are true, correct,
shown on the notice. your claim within 3 years after you filed your and complete.º
original return, you can get a refund of up toFile a separate form for each tax year in-
$700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus thevolved. 2. A statement made by the person signing
6-month extension period immediately before the claim for credit or refund that no per-
you filed the claim. son, including your spouse, was author-Time for filing a claim for refund. Generally,
ized to act on your behalf in financialyou must file your claim for a credit or refund
Example 2. The situation is the same as in matters during the period of disability (orwithin 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
Example 1, except you filed your return on Octo- the exact dates that a person was author-nal return or within 2 years after the date you
ber 30, 2008, 2 weeks after the extension period ized to act for you).paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed
ended. You paid an additional $200 on that date.before the due date (without regard to exten-
On October 31, 2011, you filed an amendedsions) are considered filed on the due date Exceptions for special types of refunds. Ifreturn and claimed a refund of $700. Although(even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or you file a claim for one of the items listed below,you filed your claim within 3 years from the datelegal holiday). These time periods are sus- the dates and limits discussed earlier may notyou filed your original return, the refund waspended while you are financially disabled, dis- apply. These items, and where to get more infor-limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 yearscussed later. mation, are as follows.plus the 6-month extension period immediatelyIf the last day for claiming a credit or refund is • Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts inbefore you filed the claim. The estimated tax ofa Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can chapter 14.) $500 paid before that period cannot be refundedfile the claim on the next business day. or credited. • Worthless security. (See Worthless securi-If you do not file a claim within this period,
ties in chapter 14.) you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund. If you file a claim more than 3 years after
• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-you file your return, the credit or refund cannot
Protective claim for refund. Generally, a tion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu-be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years
protective claim is a formal claim or amended als.) immediately before you file the claim.
return for credit or refund normally based on
• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-current litigation or expected changes in tax law Example. You filed your 2007 tax return on cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)or other legislation. You file a protective claim April 15, 2008. You paid taxes of $500. On for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.) when your right to a refund is contingent on November 5, 2009, after an examination of your
future events and may not be determinable until • Carryback of certain business tax credits.2007 return, you had to pay an additional tax of
after the statute of limitations expires. A valid (See Form 3800, General Business$200. On May 12, 2011, you file a claim for a
protective claim does not have to list a particular Credit.) refund of $300. However, because you filed your
dollar amount or demand an immediate refund. claim more than 3 years after you filed your • Claim based on an agreement with theHowever, a valid protective claim must: return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you IRS extending the period for assessmentpaid during the 2 years immediately before you• Be in writing and signed, of tax. filed your claim.
• Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN,
and other contact information, Financially disabled. The time periods for Processing claims for refund. Claims are
claiming a refund are suspended for the period usually processed 8-12 weeks after they are• Identify and describe the contingencies af- in which you are financially disabled. For a joint filed. Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal-fecting the claim, income tax return, only one spouse has to be lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is
• Clearly alert the IRS to the essential na- financially disabled for the time period to be examined, the procedures are the same as in
ture of the claim, and suspended. You are financially disabled if you the examination of a tax return.
are unable to manage your financial affairs be- If your claim is disallowed, you will receive an• Identify the specific year(s) for which a re- cause of a medically determinable physical or explanation of why it was disallowed.fund is sought. mental impairment which can be expected to
Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad- result in death or which has lasted or can be Taking your claim to court. You can sue for a
dress listed in the instructions for Form 1040X, expected to last for a continuous period of not refund in court, but you must first file a timely
under Where To File. less than 12 months. However, you are not claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim or does not act on your claim within 6 penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due Negligence or disregard. The term ªnegli-
months after you file it, you can then take your date (without regard to extensions). genceº includes a failure to make a reasonable
claim to court. For information on the burden of attempt to comply with the tax law or to exerciseFraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,proof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556. ordinary and reasonable care in preparing athe penalty is 15% for each month or part of aThe IRS provides a direct method to move return. Negligence also includes failure to keepmonth that your return is late, up to a maximumyour claim to court if: adequate books and records. You will not haveof 75%. to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-• You are filing a claim for a credit or refund Return over 60 days late. If you file your sonable basis for a position you took.based solely on contested income tax or return more than 60 days after the due date or The term ªdisregardº includes any careless,on estate tax or gift tax issues considered extended due date, the minimum penalty is the reckless, or intentional disregard.in your previously examined returns, and smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
Adequate disclosure. You can avoid the• You want to take your case to court in- Exception. You will not have to pay the penalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifstead of appealing it within the IRS. penalty if you show that you failed to file on time you adequately disclose on your return a posi-
because of reasonable cause and not because tion that has at least a reasonable basis. SeeWhen you file your claim with the IRS, you get of willful neglect. Disclosure statement, later.the direct method by requesting in writing that
This exception will not apply to an item that isyour claim be immediately rejected. A notice of Paying tax late. You will have to pay a fail- attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will notclaim disallowance will be sent to you. ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of your apply if you fail to keep adequate books andYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, records, or substantiate items properly.the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund after the due date that the tax is not paid. Thissuit in the United States District Court having Substantial understatement of income tax.penalty does not apply during the automaticjurisdiction or in the United States Court of Fed- You understate your tax if the tax shown on your6-month extension of time to file period if youeral Claims. return is less than the correct tax. The under-paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on or
statement is substantial if it is more than thebefore the due date of your return and pay theInterest on refund. If you receive a refund larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-balance when you file the return.because of your amended return, interest will be ever, the amount of the understatement may beThe monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penaltypaid on it from the due date of your original reduced to the extent the understatement is dueis half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if anreturn or the date you filed your original return, to:installment agreement is in effect for that month.whichever is later, to the date you filed the You must have filed your return by the due dateamended return. However, if the refund is not 1. Substantial authority, or(including extensions) to qualify for this reducedmade within 45 days after you file the amended penalty. 2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-return, interest will be paid up to the date the If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate sis.refund is paid. will increase to 1% at the start of the first month
If an item on your return is attributable to a taxbeginning at least 10 days after the day that theReduced refund. Your refund may be re- shelter, there is no reduction for an adequatenotice is issued. If a notice and demand forduced by an additional tax liability that has been disclosure. However, there is a reduction for aimmediate payment is issued, the rate will in-assessed against you. position with substantial authority, but only if youcrease to 1% at the start of the first monthAlso, your refund may be reduced by reasonably believed that your tax treatment wasbeginning after the day that the notice and de-amounts you owe for past-due child support, more likely than not the proper treatment.mand is issued.debts to another federal agency, or for state This penalty cannot be more than 25% of Substantial authority. Whether there is orincome tax. If your spouse owes these debts, your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay the was substantial authority for the tax treatment ofsee Offset against debts , under Refunds, ear- penalty if you can show that you had a good an item depends on the facts and circum-lier, for the correct refund procedures to follow. reason for not paying your tax on time. stances. Some of the items that may be consid-
ered are court opinions, Treasury regulations,Effect on state tax liability. If your return is Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-file revenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no-changed for any reason, it may affect your state penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis- tices and announcements issued by the IRS andincome tax liability. This includes changes made cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin thatas a result of an examination of your return by 15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by the involve the same or similar circumstances asthe IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your yours.information. return more than 60 days after the due date or
Disclosure statement. To adequately dis-extended due date, the minimum penalty is the
close the relevant facts about your tax treatmentPenalties smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
of an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State-
ment. You must also have a reasonable basisThe law provides penalties for failure to file re- Accuracy-related penalty. You may have to
for treating the item the way you did.turns or pay taxes as required. pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay
your tax because: In cases of substantial understatement only,
items that meet the requirements of Revenue
1. You show negligence or disregard of theCivil Penalties Procedure 2010-15 (or later update) are consid-
rules or regulations, ered adequately disclosed on your return with-
If you do not file your return and pay your tax by out filing Form 8275. 2. You substantially understate your incomethe due date, you may have to pay a penalty. tax, Use Form 8275-R, Regulation DisclosureYou may also have to pay a penalty if you Statement, to disclose items or positions con-3. You claim tax benefits for a transactionsubstantially understate your tax, understate a trary to regulations.that lacks economic substance, orreportable transaction, file an erroneous claim
Transaction lacking economic substance.for refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submis- 4. You fail to disclose a foreign financial as- For more information on economic substance,sion, or fail to supply your SSN or individual set. see section 7701(o).taxpayer identification number. If you provide
The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-fraudulent information on your return, you may Foreign financial asset. For more informa-ment. The penalty is 40% of any portion of thehave to pay a civil fraud penalty. tion on undisclosed foreign financial assets, seeunderpayment that is attributable to an undis- section 6662(j).Filing late. If you do not file your return by the closed noneconomic substance transaction or
due date (including extensions), you may have an undisclosed foreign financial asset transac- Reasonable cause. You will not have to
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is tion. The penalty will not be figured on any part pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea-
usually 5% for each month or part of a month of an underpayment on which the fraud penalty sonable cause) for the way you treated an item.
that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The (discussed later) is charged. You must also show that you acted in good faith.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This does not apply to a transaction that lacks 4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return. tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
economic substance. time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
each other in the next tax year, you and yourFiling erroneous claim for refund or credit. spouse must file as married individuals.You may have to pay a penalty if you file an
erroneous claim for refund or credit. The penalty Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court
is equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the decree of annulment, which holds that no valid
claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
for the way you treated an item. The penalty will married even if you filed joint returns for earlier2.
not be figured on any part of the disallowed years. You must file Form 1040X, Amended
amount of the claim that relates to the earned U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin-
income credit or on which the accuracy-related gle or head of household status for each tax yearFiling Statusor fraud penalties are charged. affected by the annulment that is not closed by
the statute of limitations for filing a tax return.Frivolous tax submission. You may have to The statute of limitations generally does not endpay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax until 3 years after your original return was filed.Introductionreturn or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous
tax return is one that does not include enough Head of household or qualifying widow(er)This chapter helps you determine which filinginformation to figure the correct tax or that con- with dependent child. If you are consideredstatus to use. There are five filing statuses.tains information clearly showing that the tax unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
• Single.you reported is substantially incorrect. For more household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a
information on frivolous returns, frivolous sub- dependent child. See Head of Household  and• Married Filing Jointly.missions, and a list of positions that are identi- Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child  to
• Married Filing Separately.fied as frivolous, see Notice 2010-33, 2010-17 see if you qualify.
I.R.B. 609, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ • Head of Household.2010-17_IRB/ar13.html. Married persons. If you are considered mar-• Qualifying Widow(er) With DependentYou will have to pay the penalty if you filed ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canChild.this kind of return or submission based on a file a joint return, or you can file separate re-frivolous position or a desire to delay or interfere turns.with the administration of federal tax laws. This If more than one filing status applies to Considered married. You are consideredincludes altering or striking out the preprinted you, choose the one that will give you married for the whole year if on the last day oflanguage above the space provided for your the lowest tax.
TIP your tax year you and your spouse meet any onesignature.
of the following tests.You must determine your filing status beforeThis penalty is added to any other penalty
you can determine your filing requirementsprovided by law. 1. You are married and living together as(chapter 1 ), standard deduction ( chapter 20 ),Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on husband and wife.and correct tax (chapter 30). You also use youryour return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the filing status in determining whether you are eligi- 2. You are living together in a common lawunderpayment due to fraud will be added to your ble to claim certain deductions and credits. marriage that is recognized in the statetax. where you now live or in the state where
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint the common law marriage began.Useful Items
return does not apply to a spouse unless some You may want to see: 3. You are married and living apart, but notpart of the underpayment is due to the fraud of
legally separated under a decree of di-that spouse. Publication vorce or separate maintenance.
Failure to supply social security number. If ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, 4. You are separated under an interlocutoryyou do not include your SSN or the SSN of and Filing Information (not final) decree of divorce. For purposesanother person where required on a return, ❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens of filing a joint return, you are not consid-statement, or other document, you will be sub-
ered divorced.ject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You will ❏ 555 Community Property
also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not
Spouse died during the year. If yourgive your SSN to another person when it is
spouse died during the year, you are consideredrequired on a return, statement, or other docu-
married for the whole year for filing status pur-ment.
poses.For example, if you have a bank account that Marital Status
If you did not remarry before the end of theearns interest, you must give your SSN to the
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfbank. The number must be shown on the Form In general, your filing status depends on
and your deceased spouse. For the next 21099-INT or other statement the bank sends whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsyou. If you do not give the bank your SSN, you ried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage
described later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withwill be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also may means only a legal union between a man and a
Dependent Child.be subject to ªbackupº withholding of income woman as husband and wife.
tax. See chapter 4.) If you remarried before the end of the taxUnmarried persons. You are considered un-You will not have to pay the penalty if you are year, you can file a joint return with your newmarried for the whole year if, on the last day ofable to show that the failure was due to reasona- spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status isyour tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-ble cause and not willful neglect. married filing separately for that year.rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-
Married persons living apart. If you liverate maintenance decree. State law governs
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,whether you are married or legally separatedCriminal Penalties you may be considered unmarried. If this appliesunder a divorce or separate maintenance de-
to you, you can file as head of household evencree.You may be subject to criminal prosecution
though you are not divorced or legally sepa-(brought to trial) for actions such as: Divorced persons. If you are divorced rated. If you qualify to file as head of householdunder a final decree by the last day of the year, instead of as married filing separately, your1. Tax evasion, you are considered unmarried for the whole standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor- year. may be lower, and you may be able to claim themation, or pay any tax due, earned income credit. See Head of Household,Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
later.3. Fraud and false statements, or divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 19

Page 22 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you areFiling a Joint Return the guardian of your spouse who is mentallySingle incompetent, you can sign the return for yourBoth you and your spouse must include all of spouse as guardian.your income, exemptions, and deductions onYour filing status is single if, on the last day of
your joint return.the year, you are unmarried or legally separated Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse is
from your spouse under a divorce or separate unable to sign the return because he or she isAccounting period. Both of you must use themaintenance decree, and you do not qualify for serving in a combat zone (such as the Persiansame accounting period, but you can use differ-another filing status. To determine your marital Gulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), and youent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-status on the last day of the year, see Marital do not have a power of attorney or other state-ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.Status, earlier. ment, you can sign for your spouse. Attach a
signed statement to your return that explainsJoint responsibility. Both of you may be heldWidow(er). Your filing status may be single if that your spouse is serving in a combat zone.responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxyou were widowed before January 1, 2010, and For more information on special tax rules forand any interest or penalty due on your jointdid not remarry before the end of 2010. How- persons who are serving in a combat zone, orreturn. One spouse may be held responsible forever, you might be able to use another filing who are in missing status as a result of servingall the tax due even if all the income was earnedstatus that will give you a lower tax. See Head of in a combat zone, see Publication 3, Armedby the other spouse.Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De- Forces' Tax Guide.
Divorced taxpayer. You may be held jointlypendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.       
Other reasons spouse cannot sign.  Ifand individually responsible for any tax, interest,
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyand penalties due on a joint return filed beforeHow to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyyour divorce. This responsibility may apply evenhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalif your divorce decree states that your formerand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or
document giving you permission to act for yourspouse will be responsible for any amounts dueForm 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyon previously filed joint returns.1040, show your filing status as single by check-
of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of Relief from joint responsibility. In some Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-the Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa- cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil- tative.tion Worksheet to figure your tax. ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return
for items of the other spouse that were incor- Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A
rectly reported on the joint return. You can ask joint return generally cannot be filed if either
for relief no matter how small the liability. spouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringMarried Filing Jointly There are three types of relief available. the tax year. However, if one spouse was a
nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was1. Innocent spouse relief.You can choose married filing jointly as your married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at thefiling status if you are married and both you and 2. Separation of liability, which applies to joint end of the year, the spouses can choose to file ayour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint filers who are divorced, widowed, legally joint return. If you do file a joint return, you andreturn, you report your combined income and separated, or have not lived together for your spouse are both treated as U.S. residentsdeduct your combined allowable expenses. You the 12 months ending on the date election for the entire tax year. For information on thiscan file a joint return even if one of you had no of this relief is filed. choice, see chapter 1 of Publication 519.income or deductions.
3. Equitable relief.If you and your spouse decide to file a joint
return, your tax may be lower than your com-  You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your cent Spouse Relief, to request any of these Married Filingstandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc- kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousetions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who Separatelybenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses. may qualify for them.
If you and your spouse each have in- You can choose married filing separately asSigning a joint return. For a return to become, you may want to figure your tax your filing status if you are married. This filingconsidered a joint return, both husband and wifeboth on a joint return and on separate
TIP status may benefit you if you want to be respon-generally must sign the return.returns (using the filing status of married filing sible only for your own tax or if it results in less
separately). Choose the method that gives the Spouse died before signing. If your tax than filing a joint return.
two of you the lower combined tax.    spouse died before signing the return, the exec- If you and your spouse do not agree to file autor or administrator must sign the return for joint return, you may have to use this filing statusyour spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasHow to file. If you file as married filing jointly, unless you qualify for head of household status,yet been appointed as executor or administrator,you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you discussed next.you can sign the return for your spouse andhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind, You may be able to choose head of house-enter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the areaand meet other requirements, you can file Form hold filing status if you live apart from yourwhere you sign the return.1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, spouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredshow this filing status by checking the box on Spouse away from home. If your spouse is unmarried (explained later, under Head ofline 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the away from home, you should prepare the return, Household). This can apply to you even if youTax Table or Section B of the Tax Computation sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that are not divorced or legally separated. If youWorksheet to figure your tax. it can be filed on time. qualify to file as head of household, instead of as
married filing separately, your tax may be lower,Injury or disease prevents signing. If yourSpouse died during the year. If your spouse you may be able to claim the earned incomespouse cannot sign because of disease or injurydied during the year, you are considered mar- credit and certain other credits, and your stan-and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse'sried for the whole year and can choose married dard deduction will be higher. The head ofname in the proper space on the return followedfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse household filing status allows you to choose theby the words ªBy (your name), Husband (ordied during the year , earlier, for more informa- standard deduction even if your spouse choosesWife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro-tion. to itemize deductions. See Head of Household,vided for your signature. Attach a dated state- later, for more information.Divorced persons. If you are divorced under ment, signed by you, to the return. The
a final decree by the last day of the year, you are statement should include the form number of the You will generally pay more combined
considered unmarried for the whole year and return you are filing, the tax year, the reason tax on separate returns than you would
you cannot choose married filing jointly as your your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse on a joint return for the reasons listed
TIP
filing status. has agreed to your signing for him or her. under Special Rules, later. However, unless you
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 23 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are required to file separately, you should figure equivalent railroad retirement benefits date of the separate return or returns. This does
you received. not include any extensions. A separate returnyour tax both ways (on a joint return and on
includes a return filed by you or your spouseseparate returns). This way you can make sure
9. The following credits are reduced at in- claiming married filing separately, single, oryou are using the filing status that results in the
come levels that are half those for a joint head of household filing status.lowest combined tax. When figuring the com-
return:bined tax of husband and wife, you may want to
consider state taxes as well as federal taxes. a. The child tax credit, and Separate Returns After
Joint Returnb. The retirement savings contributionsHow to file. If you file a separate return, you
credit.generally report only your own income, exemp- Once you file a joint return, you cannot choosetions, credits, and deductions on your individual to file separate returns for that year after the due10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500return. You can claim an exemption for your date of the return.(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-spouse if your spouse had no gross income and
turn).was not the dependent of another person. How- Exception. A personal representative for aever, if your spouse had any gross income or 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you decedent can change from a joint return electedwas the dependent of someone else, you cannot cannot claim the standard deduction. If you by the surviving spouse to a separate return for
claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa- can claim the standard deduction, your ba- the decedent. The personal representative has
rate return. sic standard deduction is half the amount 1 year from the due date of the return (including
allowed on a joint return. If you file as married filing separately, you extensions) to make the change. See Publica-
can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this tion 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-12. Your first-time homebuyer credit is limitedfiling status by checking the box on line 3 of tors, for more information on filing a return for ato $4,000 (instead of $8,000 if you filed aeither form. You also must enter your spouse's decedent.joint return). If the special rule for long-timefull name in the space provided and must enter residents of the same main home applies,your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provided the credit is limited to $3,250 (instead ofunless your spouse does not have and is not $6,500 if you filed a joint return).required to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar- Head of Householdried filing separately column of the Tax Table or Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits. If yourSection C of the Tax Computation Worksheet to You may be able to file as head of household ifAGI on a separate return is lower than it wouldfigure your tax. you meet all the following requirements.have been on a joint return, you may be able to
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions
1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar-that are limited by AGI, such as medical ex-Special Rules riedº on the last day of the year.penses.
If you choose married filing separately as your 2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).filing status, the following special rules apply. ing up a home for the year.You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourBecause of these special rules, you will usually contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in thepay more tax on a separate return than if you spouse were covered by an employee retire- home for more than half the year (exceptused another filing status that you qualify for. ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc- for temporary absences, such as school).
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is However, if the ªqualifying personº is your
more than a certain amount. This amount is dependent parent, he or she does not1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than
much lower for married individuals who file sep- have to live with you. See Special rule forit would be on a joint return.
arately and lived together at any time during the parent, later, under Qualifying Person.2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al- year. For more information, see How Much Can
ternative minimum tax will be half that al- You Deduct in chapter 17. If you qualify to file as head of house-
lowed to a joint return filer. hold, your tax rate usually will be lowerRental activity losses. If you actively partici- than the rates for single or married fil-3. You cannot take the credit for child and
TIP pated in a passive rental real estate activity that ing separately. You will also receive a higherdependent care expenses in most cases, produced a loss, you generally can deduct the standard deduction than if you file as single orand the amount that you can exclude from loss from your nonpassive income, up to married filing separately.income under an employer's dependent $25,000. This is called a special allowance.
care assistance program is limited to However, married persons filing separate re- Kidnapped child. A child may qualify you to$2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint turns who lived together at any time during the file as head of household even if the child hasreturn). For more information about these year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar- been kidnapped. For more information, seeexpenses, the credit, and the exclusion, ried persons filing separate returns who lived Publication 501.see chapter 32. apart at all times during the year are each al-
lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance4. You cannot take the earned income credit. How to file. If you file as head of household,for losses from passive real estate activities. you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9. Indicate your choice of this filing status byadoption expenses in most cases.
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theCommunity property states. If you live in Ari-6. You cannot take the education credits (the Head of household column of the Tax Table orzona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,
American opportunity credit and lifetime Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet toNew Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin
learning credit) or the deduction for student figure your tax.and file separately, your income may be consid-
loan interest. ered separate income or community income for
income tax purposes. See Publication 555.7. You cannot exclude any interest income Considered Unmarried
from qualified U.S. savings bonds that you
used for higher education expenses. To qualify for head of household status, you
Joint Return After must be either unmarried or considered unmar-8. If you lived with your spouse at any time Separate Returns ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-during the tax year: ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if
You can change your filing status by filing an you meet all the following tests.a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- amended return using Form 1040X.erly or the disabled, and If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a 1. You file a separate return (defined earlier
b. You will have to include in income more separate return, you generally can change to a under Joint Return After Separate Re-
(up to 85%) of any social security or joint return any time within 3 years from the due turns).
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- you cannot claim the exemption only be- in determining your income and expenses. See
cause the noncustodial parent can claim Publication 555 for more information.ing up your home for the tax year.
the child using the rules described in Chil-3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur- Nonresident alien spouse. You are consid-dren of divorced or separated parents oring the last 6 months of the tax year. Your ered unmarried for head of household purposesparents who live apart under Qualifying
spouse is considered to live in your home if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anyChild in chapter 3, or in Support Test for
even if he or she is temporarily absent due time during the year and you do not choose toChildren of Divorced or Separated Parents
to special circumstances. See Temporary treat your nonresident spouse as a residentor Parents Who Live Apart under Qualify-
alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingabsences, under Qualifying Person, later. ing Relative in chapter 3. The general rules
person for head of household purposes. Youfor claiming an exemption for a dependent4. Your home was the main home of your must have another qualifying person and meetare explained under Exemptions for De-child, stepchild, or foster child for more the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofpendents in chapter 3.than half the year. (See Home of qualifying household. 
person, under Qualifying Person, later, for If you were considered married for part Earned income credit. Even if you are con-rules applying to a child's birth, death, or of the year and lived in a community sidered unmarried for head of household pur-temporary absence during the year.) property state (listed earlier under Mar-
CAUTION
! poses because you are married to a nonresidentried Filing Separately), special rules may apply5. You must be able to claim an exemption alien, you are still considered married for pur-
for the child. However, you meet this test if poses of the earned income credit (unless you
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing
status. 
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether orqualifying child (such as a son,
not you can claim an exemptiondaughter, or grandchild who lived with
for the person.you more than half the year and meets
certain other tests)2
he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person.3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative4 who is your father or
mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative4 other than your father
year, and he or she is related to you in oneor mother (such as a grandparent,
of the ways listed under Relatives who dobrother, or sister who meets certain
not have to live with you in chapter 3 andtests)
you can claim an exemption for him or her5
he or she did not live with you more than half not a qualifying person.
the year
he or she is not related to you in one of the not a qualifying person.
ways listed under Relatives who do not have
to live with you in chapter 3 and is your
qualifying relative only because he or she
lived with you all year as a member of your
household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for head of household filing
status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced
or separated parents or parents who live apart under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child
generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an
exemption.
3This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
meet the five tests listed earlier under Consid- Example 1 Ðchild. Your unmarried son year or, if less, the period during which the
ered Unmarried ). You are not entitled to the lived with you all year and was 18 years old at individual lived.
credit unless you file a joint return with your the end of the year. He did not provide more
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,spouse and meet other qualifications. See chap- than half of his own support and does not meet
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived inter 36 for more information. the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else.
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-As a result, he is your qualifying child (see Quali-Choice to treat spouse as resident. You ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentfying Child , in chapter 3) and, because he isare considered married if you choose to treat for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidsingle, is a qualifying person for you to claimyour spouse as a resident alien. $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Yourhead of household filing status.
brother made no other payments toward your
Keeping Up a Home Example 2 Ðchild who is not qualifying mother's support. Your mother had no income.
person. The facts are the same as in Example Because you paid more than half the cost of
To qualify for head of household status, you 1 except your son was 25 years old at the end of keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu-
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping the year and his gross income was $5,000. Be- ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an
up a home for the year. You can determine cause he does not meet the age test (explained exemption for her, you can file as a head of
whether you paid more than half of the cost of under Qualifying Child in chapter 3), your son is household.
keeping up a home by using the worksheet not your qualifying child. Because he does not
shown on this page. meet the gross income test (explained later
under Qualifying Relative in chapter 3), he is notCost of Keeping Up a Home your qualifying relative. As a result, he is not Qualifying Widow(er)your qualifying person for head of household
Keep for Your Records
 purposes. With Dependent Child
Example 3 Ð girlfriend. Your girlfriend If your spouse died in 2010, you can use marriedAmount lived with you all year. Even though she may be filing jointly as your filing status for 2010 if youYou Total your qualifying relative if the gross income and otherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofPaid Cost support tests (explained in chapter 3) are met, death is the last year for which you can file jointlyshe is not your qualifying person for head ofProperty taxes $ $ with your deceased spouse. See Married Filinghousehold purposes because she is not related Jointly, earlier.Mortgage interest expense to you in one of the ways listed under Relatives You may be eligible to use qualifyingRent who do not have to live with you  in chapter 3. widow(er) with dependent child as your filingUtility charges See Table 2-1. status for 2 years following the year your spouseRepairs/maintenance
died. For example, if your spouse died in 2009,Property insurance Example 4 Ðgirlfriend's child. The facts and you have not remarried, you may be able toFood consumed are the same as in Example 3 except your girl- use this filing status for 2010 and 2011.on the premises friend's 10-year-old son also lived with you all This filing status entitles you to use jointOther household expenses year. He is not your qualifying child and, be- return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-Totals $ $ cause he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he is tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).not your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualifying This status does not entitle you to file a jointMinus total amount you ( ) Child Test, in chapter 3). As a result, he is not return.paid your qualifying person for head of household
purposes. How to file. If you file as qualifying widow(er)Amount others paid $ with dependent child, you can use either FormHome of qualifying person. Generally, the 1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusqualifying person must live with you for more by checking the box on line 5 of either form. UseIf the total amount you paid is more than the amount than half of the year. the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying more
or Section B of the Tax Computation WorksheetSpecial rule for parent. If your qualifyingthan half the cost of keeping up the home.
to figure your tax.person is your father or mother, you may be
eligible to file as head of household even if your Eligibility rules. You are eligible to file yourCosts you include. Include in the cost of up- father or mother does not live with you. How- 2010 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest, ever, you must be able to claim an exemption for pendent child if you meet all of the followingreal estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- your father or mother. Also, you must pay more tests.pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. than half the cost of keeping up a home that was
If you used payments you received under the main home for the entire year for your father • You were entitled to file a joint return with
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or mother. You are keeping up a main home for your spouse for the year your spouse
(TANF) or other public assistance programs to your father or mother if you pay more than half died. It does not matter whether you actu-
pay part of the cost of keeping up your home, the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or ally filed a joint return.
you cannot count them as money you paid. home for the elderly. • Your spouse died in 2008 or 2009 and youHowever, you must include them in the total cost Temporary absences. You and your quali- did not remarry before the end of 2010.of keeping up your home to figure if you paid fying person are considered to live togetherover half the cost. • You have a child or stepchild for whomeven if one or both of you are temporarily absent you can claim an exemption. This doesfrom your home due to special circumstancesCosts you do not include. Do not include in not include a foster child.such as illness, education, business, vacation,the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
or military service. It must be reasonable to • This child lived in your home all year, ex-education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
assume that the absent person will return to the cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-surance, or transportation. Also, do not include
home after the temporary absence. You must rary absences, earlier, under Head ofthe rental value of a home you own or the value
continue to keep up the home during the ab- Household. There are also exceptions, de-of your services or those of a member of your
sence. scribed later, for a child who was born orhousehold.
died during the year, and for a kidnappedDeath or birth. You may be eligible to file as child.head of household if the individual who qualifiesQualifying Person
you for this filing status is born or dies during the • You paid more than half the cost of keep-
See Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person. year. You must have provided more than half of ing up a home for the year. See Keeping
Any person not described in Table 2-1 is not the cost of keeping up a home that was the Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-
a qualifying person. individual's main home for more than half the hold.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
As mentioned earlier, this filing status Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable filing a return, and was not the dependent of
is available for only 2 years following income. You can deduct $3,650 for each ex- another taxpayer. This is true even if the other
the year your spouse died. emption you claim in 2010. taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse as
CAUTION
!
a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is aHow to claim exemptions.  How you claim an nonresident alien.Example.  John Reed's wife died in 2008. exemption on your tax return depends on which
John has not remarried. During 2009 and 2010, form you file. Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringhe continued to keep up a home for himself and If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption the year and you file a joint return for yourselfhis child, who lives with him and for whom he amount is combined with the standard deduction and your deceased spouse, you generally cancan claim an exemption. For 2008 he was enti- amount and entered on line 5. claim your spouse's exemption under the rulestled to file a joint return for himself and his  If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow just explained under Joint return . If you file adeceased wife. For 2009 and 2010, he can file the instructions for the form. The total number of separate return for the year, you may be able toas qualifying widower with a dependent child. exemptions you can claim is the total in the box claim your spouse's exemption under the rulesAfter 2010 he can file as head of household if he on line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A) just described in Separate return.qualifies. or line 42 (Form 1040). If you remarried during the year, you cannot
take an exemption for your deceased spouse.Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a Useful Items If you are a surviving spouse without grossqualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the You may want to see: income and you remarry in the year your spousechild who qualifies you for this filing status is
died, you can be claimed as an exemption onborn or dies during the year. You must have Publication both the final separate return of your deceasedprovided more than half of the cost of keeping up
spouse and the separate return of your newa home that was the child's main home during ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withthe entire part of the year he or she was alive. and Filing Information
your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
exemption only on that return.Kidnapped child. A child may qualify you for Form (and Instructions)
this filing status even if the child has been kid- ❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-napped. See Publication 501.
tained a final decree of divorce or separate❏ 8332 Release/Revocation of Release of
maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotClaim to Exemption for Child by
take your former spouse's exemption. This ruleCustodial Parent
applies even if you provided all of your former
spouse's support.
3. Exemptions
Exemptions forThere are two types of exemptions you may be
able to take:Personal Dependents
• Personal exemptions for yourself and your
You are allowed one exemption for each personspouse, andExemptions and
you can claim as a dependent. You can claim an• Exemptions for dependents (dependency exemption for a dependent even if your depen-exemptions).Dependents dent files a return.
While each is worth the same amount ($3,650 The term ªdependentº means:
for 2010), different rules apply to each type. • A qualifying child, or
What's New • A qualifying relative.Personal Exemptions
Limits on personal exemptions ended. For The terms ª qualifying child º and ª qualifyingYou are generally allowed one exemption for2010, you will no longer lose part of your deduc- relativeº are defined later.yourself. If you are married, you may be allowedtion for personal exemptions, regardless of the You can claim an exemption for a qualifyingone exemption for your spouse. These areamount of your adjusted gross income. child or qualifying relative only if these threecalled personal exemptions.
tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.Your Own Exemption
Introduction 2. Joint return test.
You can take one exemption for yourself unlessThis chapter discusses exemptions. The follow- 3. Citizen or resident test.you can be claimed as a dependent by anothering topics will be explained. taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim These three tests are explained in detail
you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-• Personal exemptions Ð You generally later.
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer doescan take one for yourself and, if you are All the requirements for claiming an exemp-not actually claim you as a dependent.married, one for your spouse. tion for a dependent are summarized in Table
3-1.• Exemptions for dependents Ð You gener-
ally can take an exemption for each of Dependent not allowed a personalYour Spouse's Exemptionyour dependents. A dependent is your exemption. If you can claim an ex-qualifying child or qualifying relative. If you Your spouse is never considered your depen- emption for your dependent, the de-
CAUTION
!are entitled to claim an exemption for a dent. pendent cannot claim his or her own personaldependent, that dependent cannot claim a exemption on his or her own tax return. This isJoint return. On a joint return you can claimpersonal exemption on his or her own tax true even if you do not claim the dependent'sone exemption for yourself and one for yourreturn. exemption on your return.spouse.• Social security number (SSN) requirement
for dependents Ð You must list the social Separate return. If you file a separate return, Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If these
security number of any dependent for you can claim an exemption for your spouse people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-
whom you claim an exemption. only if your spouse had no gross income, is not tions for them.
Page 24 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 27 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year the ways listed under Relatives who do not have to
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), (b) live with you, or (b) must live with you all year as a
under age 24 at the end of the year, a full-time student, and member of your household2 (and your relationship
younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), or (c) any must not violate local law).
age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the than $3,650.3
year.2
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her support for the year.4
own support for the year.
5. The child is not filing a joint return for the year (unless that
return is filed only as a claim for refund)
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than
one person, only one person can actually treat the child as a
qualifying child. See the Special Rule for Qualifying Child of More
Than One Person to find out which person is the person entitled
to claim the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents or
parents who live apart, and kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents or parents who live apart, and kidnapped
 children.
Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a child withheld taxes. The exception to the joint returnJoint Return Test
tax credit for each qualifying child who was test applies, so you are not disqualified from
You generally cannot claim a married person asunder age 17 at the end of the year if you claiming their exemptions just because they file
a dependent if he or she files a joint return.claimed an exemption for that child. For more a joint return. You can claim their exemptions if
information, see chapter 34. you meet all the other requirements to do so.
Exception. An exception to the joint return
Example 3. The facts are the same as intest applies if your child and his or her spouse
Example 2 except your son had $2,000 of wagesfile a joint return merely as a claim for refund and
and no interest income or backup withholding.no tax liability would exist for either spouse on
No taxes were taken out of his pay and he andDependent Taxpayer Test separate returns.
his wife are not required to file a tax return, but
If you could be claimed as a dependent by an- they file a joint return to claim a making work payExample 1. You supported your 18-year-old
other person, you cannot claim anyone else as a credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount.daughter, and she lived with you all year while
dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or They file the return to get the making work payher husband was in the Armed Forces. The
qualifying relative, you cannot claim that person credit, so they are not filing it only as a claim forcouple files a joint return. You cannot take an
as a dependent. refund. The exception to the joint return testexemption for your daughter.
If you are filing a joint return and your spouse does not apply, so you cannot claim an exemp-
could be claimed as a dependent by someone tion for either of them.Example 2. Your 18-year-old son and his
else, you and your spouse cannot claim any 17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income
dependents on your joint return. and no earned income. Neither is required to file
a tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter-
est income due to backup withholding so they
filed a joint return only to get a refund of the
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Page 28 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- (1), or by a state, county, or local govern-Citizen or Resident Test
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen- ment agency.
You cannot claim a person as a dependent un- dant (for example, your niece or nephew) The 5 calendar months do not have to be con-less that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident of any of them. secutive.alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or
School defined. A school can be an ele-Mexico. However, there is an exception for cer- Adopted child. An adopted child is always mentary school, junior or senior high school,tain adopted children, as explained next. treated as your own child. The term ªadopted college, university, or technical, trade, orchildº includes a child who was lawfully placed mechanical school. However, an on-the-jobException for adopted child. If you are a with you for legal adoption. training course, correspondence school, orU.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally
school offering courses only through the InternetFoster child. A foster child is an individualadopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S.
does not count as a school.who is placed with you by an authorized place-resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or otherthe child lived with you as a member of your Vocational high school students. Stu-order of any court of competent jurisdiction.household all year. This exception also applies if dents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus-
the child was lawfully placed with you for legal try as a part of a school's regular course of
adoption. Age Test classroom and practical training are considered
full-time students.To meet this test, a child must be:Child's place of residence. Children usually
Permanently and totally disabled. Yourare citizens or residents of the country of their • Under age 19 at the end of the year and child is permanently and totally disabled if bothparents. younger than you (or your spouse, if filing of the following apply.jointly),If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even if • He or she cannot engage in any substan-• A full-time student under age 24 at the endthe other parent was a nonresident alien and the tial gainful activity because of a physical orof the year and younger than you (or yourchild was born in a foreign country. If so, this test mental condition.spouse, if filing jointly), oris met. • A doctor determines the condition has• Permanently and totally disabled at any lasted or can be expected to last continu-time during the year, regardless of age.Foreign students' place of residence. For- ously for at least a year or can lead toeign students brought to this country under a death.
qualified international education exchange pro- Example. Your son turned 19 on December
gram and placed in American homes for a tem- 10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis-
Residency Testporary period generally are not U.S. residents abled or a full-time student, he does not meet
and do not meet this test. You cannot claim an the age test because, at the end of the year, he To meet this test, your child must have lived withexemption for them. However, if you provided a was not under age 19. you for more than half of the year. There arehome for a foreign student, you may be able to exceptions for temporary absences, childrenChild must be younger than you or spouse.take a charitable contribution deduction. See who were born or died during the year, kid-To be your qualifying child, a child who is notExpenses Paid for Student Living With You  in napped children, and children of divorced orpermanently and totally disabled must bechapter 24. separated parents.younger than you. However, if you are married
filing jointly, the child must be younger than youU.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual Temporary absences. Your child is consid-or your spouse but does not have to be youngerwho, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or her ered to have lived with you during periods ofthan both of you.allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationals time when one of you, or both, are temporarily
include American Samoans and Northern Mari- absent due to special circumstances such as:Example 1 ± child not younger than you orana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na- spouse. Your 23-year-old brother, who is a • Illness,tionals instead of U.S. citizens. full-time student and unmarried, lives with you • Education,and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both you
and your spouse are 21 years old, and you file aQualifying Child • Business,
joint return. Your brother is not your qualifying • Vacation, orThere are five tests that must be met for a child child because he is not younger than you or your
to be your qualifying child. The five tests are: spouse. • Military service.
1. Relationship, Example 2 ± child younger than your Death or birth of child. A child who was bornspouse but not younger than you. The facts2. Age, or died during the year is treated as having livedare the same as in Example 1 except that your with you all year if your home was the child's3. Residency, spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is home the entire time he or she was alive duringyounger than your spouse and you and your4. Support, and the year. The same is true if the child lived withspouse are filing a joint return, your brother is you all year except for any required hospital stay5. Joint return. your qualifying child, even though he is not following birth.younger than you.These tests are explained next.
Child born alive. You may be able to claimFull-time student. A full-time student is a stu-If a child meets the five tests to be the an exemption for a child who was born alivedent who is enrolled for the number of hours orqualifying child of more than one per- during the year, even if the child lived only for acourses the school considers to be full-time at-son, a special rule applies to determine
CAUTION
! moment. State or local law must treat the childtendance.which person can actually treat the child as a as having been born alive. There must be proofqualifying child. See Special Rule for Qualifying Student defined. To qualify as a student, of a live birth shown by an official document,Child of More Than One Person, later. your child must be, during some part of each of such as a birth certificate. The child must be
any 5 calendar months of the year: your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and all
the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-
1. A full-time student at a school that has aRelationship Test pendent must be met.
regular teaching staff, course of study, and
Stillborn child. You cannot claim an ex-To meet this test, a child must be: a regularly enrolled student body at the
emption for a stillborn child.school, or• Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child,
or a descendant (for example, your 2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as
grandchild) of any of them, or ing course given by a school described in meeting the residency test even if the child has
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
been kidnapped, but both of the following state- Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. custodial parent because you have the higher
The custodial parent is the parent with whom the adjusted gross income.ments must be true.
child lived for the greater number of nights dur-
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement ing the year. The other parent is the noncus- Example 4 ± child is at parent's home but
authorities to have been kidnapped by todial parent. with other parent. Your son normally lives
someone who is not a member of your If the parents divorced or separated during with you during the week and with his other
family or the child's family. the year and the child lived with both parents parent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend.
before the separation, the custodial parent is the You become ill and are hospitalized. The other2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the one with whom the child lived for the greater parent lives in your home with your son for 10child lived with you for more than half of number of nights during the rest of the year. consecutive days while you are in the hospital.the part of the year before the date of the A child is treated as living with a parent for a Your son is treated as living with you during thiskidnapping. night if the child sleeps: 10-day period because he was living in your
This treatment applies for all years until the home.• At that parent's home, whether or not thechild is returned. However, the last year this parent is present, ortreatment can apply is the earlier of: Example 5 ± child emancipated in May.
• In the company of the parent, when the When your son turned age 18 in May 2010, he1. The year there is a determination that the child does not sleep at a parent's home became emancipated under the law of the statechild is dead, or (for example, the parent and child are on where he lives. As a result, he is not considered
vacation together).2. The year the child would have reached in the custody of his parents for more than half of
age 18. the year. The special rule for children of divorced
Equal number of nights. If the child lived or separated parents does not apply.with each parent for an equal number of nights
Children of divorced or separated parents or during the year, the custodial parent is the par- Example 6 ± child emancipated in August.parents who live apart. In most cases, be- ent with the higher adjusted gross income. Your daughter lives with you from January 1,cause of the residency test, a child of divorced or 2010, until May 31, 2010, and lives with herDecember 31. The night of December 31 isseparated parents is the qualifying child of the other parent, your ex-spouse, from June 1,treated as part of the year in which it begins. Forcustodial parent. However, the child will be 2010, through the end of the year. She turns 18example, December 31, 2010, is treated as parttreated as the qualifying child of the noncus- and is emancipated under state law on August 1,of 2010.
todial parent if all four of the following state- 2010. Because she is treated as not living withEmancipated child. If a child is emanci-ments are true. either parent beginning on August 1, she ispated under state law, the child is treated as not treated as living with you the greater number of1. The parents: living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6. nights in 2010. You are the custodial parent.
Absences. If a child was not with either par-a. Are divorced or legally separated under Written declaration.  The custodial parentent on a particular night (because, for example,a decree of divorce or separate mainte- may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementthe child was staying at a friend's house), thenance, (containing the same information required by thechild is treated as living with the parent with form) to make the written declaration to releaseb. Are separated under a written separa- whom the child normally would have lived for the exemption to the noncustodial parent. Thetion agreement, or that night, except for the absence. But if it cannot noncustodial parent must attach a copy of thebe determined with which parent the child nor-c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 form or statement to his or her tax return.mally would have lived or if the child would notmonths of the year, whether or not they The exemption can be released for 1 year,have lived with either parent that night, the childare or were married. for a number of specified years (for example,is treated as not living with either parent that
alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-night.2. The child received over half of his or her fied in the declaration.support for the year from the parents. Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree ornighttime work schedule, a child lives for a3. The child is in the custody of one or both separation agreement. If the divorce decreegreater number of days but not nights with theparents for more than half of the year. or separation agreement went into effect afterparent who works at night, that parent is treated
1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent4. Either of the following statements is true. as the custodial parent. On a school day, the
may be able to attach certain pages from thechild is treated as living at the primary residence
a. The custodial parent signs a written decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. Theregistered with the school.
declaration, discussed later, that he or decree or agreement must state all three of the
she will not claim the child as a depen- Example 1 ± child lived with one parent following.
dent for the year, and the noncustodial greater number of nights. You and your
1. The noncustodial parent can claim theparent attaches this written declaration child's other parent are divorced. In 2010, your
child as a dependent without regard to anyto his or her return. (If the decree or child lived with you 210 nights and with the other
condition, such as payment of support.agreement went into effect after 1984 parent 155 nights. You are the custodial parent.
and before 2009, see Post-1984 and 2. The custodial parent will not claim the childExample 2 ± child is away at camp. Inpre-2009 divorce decree or separation as a dependent for the year.2010, your daughter lives with each parent foragreement, later. If the decree or agree-
3. The years for which the noncustodial par-alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6ment went into effect after 2008, see
ent, rather than the custodial parent, canweeks at summer camp. During the time she isPost-2008 divorce decree or separation
claim the child as a dependent.at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3agreement, later.)
weeks and with her other parent, your The noncustodial parent must attach all ofb. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how long the following pages of the decree or agreementrate maintenance or written separation she would have lived with each parent if she had to his or her tax return.agreement that applies to 2010 states not attended summer camp.
that the noncustodial parent can claim • The cover page (write the other parent's
the child as a dependent, the decree or social security number on this page).Example 3 ± child lived same number of
agreement was not changed after 1984 days with each parent. Your son lived with • The pages that include all of the informa-to say the noncustodial parent cannot you 180 nights during the year and lived the tion identified in items (1) through (3)claim the child as a dependent, and the same number of nights with his other parent, above.noncustodial parent provides at least your ex-spouse. Your adjusted gross income is
$600 for the child's support during the • The signature page with the other parent's$40,000. Your ex-spouse's adjusted gross in-
year. come is $25,000. You are treated as your son's signature and the date of the agreement.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation qualified to receive deductible charitable contri- does not apply, so you cannot claim an exemp-
agreement. The noncustodial parent can no butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- tion for either of them.
longer attach pages from the decree or agree- ble contributions but are not considered support
ment instead of Form 8332 if the decree or you provided. For more information about the
agreement went into effect after 2008. The cus- deduction for charitable contributions, see chap- Special Rule for Qualifying Child of
todial parent must sign either Form 8332 or a ter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are not More Than One Person
similar statement whose only purpose is to re- deductible as charitable contributions, they are
lease the custodial parent's claim to an exemp- considered support you provided. If your qualifying child is not a qualify-tion for a child, and the noncustodial parent must If you are in the trade or business of provid- ing child of anyone else, this specialattach a copy to his or her return. The form or ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses rule does not apply to you and you do
TIPstatement must release the custodial parent's are not considered support provided by you. not need to read about it. This is also true if yourclaim to the child without any conditions. For qualifying child is not a qualifying child of anyoneexample, the release must not depend on the Example 1.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with else except your spouse with whom you file anoncustodial parent paying support. Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of the joint return.year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because theyThe noncustodial parent must attach
wanted to adopt her (although she had not been If a child is treated as the qualifyingthe required information even if it was
placed with them for adoption). They did not child of the noncustodial parent underfiled with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!
care for her as a trade or business or to benefit the rules for children of divorced or
CAUTION
!
the agency that placed her in their home. The separated parents or parents who live apart de-Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct- scribed earlier, see Applying this special rule toemption. The custodial parent can revoke a
ible as charitable contributions but are consid- divorced or separated parents or parents whorelease of claim to exemption that he or she
ered support they provided for Lauren.previously released to the noncustodial parent live apart, later.
on Form 8332 or a similar statement. If the Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,Example 2. You provided $3,000 towardcustodial parent provided, or made reasonable age, residency, support, and joint return tests toyour 10-year-old foster child's support for theefforts to provide, the noncustodial parent with be a qualifying child of more than one person.year. The state government provided $4,000,written notice of the revocation in 2009, the Although the child meets the conditions to be awhich is considered support provided by therevocation can be effective no earlier than 2010. qualifying child of each of these persons, onlystate, not by the child. See Support provided byThe custodial parent can use Part III of Form one person can actually treat the child as athe state (welfare, food stamps, housing, etc.) ,8332 for this purpose and must attach a copy of qualifying child to take all of the following taxlater. Your foster child did not provide more thanthe revocation to his or her return for each tax benefits (provided the person is eligible for eachhalf of her own support for the year.year he or she claims the child as a dependent benefit).as a result of the revocation. Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 1. The exemption for the child.Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup- child who is a full-time student is not taken into
port provided by your new spouse is treated as account in determining whether the child pro- 2. The child tax credit.
provided by you. vided more than half of his or her own support. 3. Head of household filing status.
Parents who never married. This special
4. The credit for child and dependent carerule for divorced or separated parents also ap-
Joint Return Test (To Be a expenses.plies to parents who never married and lived
Qualifying Child)apart at all times during the last 6 months of the 5. The exclusion from income for dependent
year. care benefits.To meet this test, the child cannot file a joint
return for the year. 6. The earned income credit.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying The other person cannot take any of theseException. An exception to the joint returnChild) benefits based on this qualifying child. In othertest applies if your child and his or her spouse
words, you and the other person cannot agree tofile a joint return merely as a claim for refund.To meet this test, the child cannot have provided divide these tax benefits between you. The othermore than half of his or her own support for the person cannot take any of these tax benefitsExample 1. You supported your 18-year-oldyear. unless he or she has a different qualifying child.daughter, and she lived with you all year whileThis test is different from the support test to her husband was in the Armed Forces. Thebe a qualifying relative, which is described later. Tiebreaker rules. To determine which personcouple files a joint return. Because your daugh-However, to see what is or is not support, see ter filed a joint return, she is not your qualifying can treat the child as a qualifying child to claimSupport Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , child. these six tax benefits, the following tie-breakerlater. If you are not sure whether a child provided rules apply.more than half of his or her own support, you Example 2. Your 18-year-old son and hismay find Worksheet 3-1 helpful. • If only one of the persons is the child's17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income parent, the child is treated as the qualify-and no earned income. Neither is required to fileExample. You provided $4,000 toward your ing child of the parent.a tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter-16-year-old son's support for the year. He has a est income due to backup withholding so they • If the parents do not file a joint return to-part-time job and provided $6,000 to his own filed a joint return only to get a refund of the gether but both parents claim the child assupport. He provided more than half of his own withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return a qualifying child, the IRS will treat thesupport for the year. He is not your qualifying test applies, so your son may be your qualifying child as the qualifying child of the parentchild. child if all the other tests are met. with whom the child lived for the longer
Foster care payments and expenses. Pay- period of time during the year. If the child
Example 3. The facts are the same as inments you receive for the support of a foster lived with each parent for the sameExample 2 except your son had $2,000 of wageschild from a child placement agency are consid- amount of time, the IRS will treat the childand no interest income or backup withholding.ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, as the qualifying child of the parent whoNo taxes were taken out of his pay and he andpayments you receive for the support of a foster had the higher adjusted gross incomehis wife are not required to file a tax return, butchild from a state or county are considered sup- (AGI) for the year.they file a joint return to claim a making work payport provided by the state or county.
• If no parent can claim the child as a quali-credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount.If you are not in the trade or business of
fying child, the child is treated as the quali-They file the return to get the making work payproviding foster care and your unreimbursed
credit, so they are not filing it only as a claim for fying child of the person who had theout-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster
refund. The exception to the joint return test highest AGI for the year.child were mainly to benefit an organization
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify- qualifying child. If she can claim you as a depen- not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both
dent, then you cannot claim your daughter as a you and his father because he meets the rela-ing child but no parent does so claim the
dependent because of the Dependent Taxpayer tionship, age, residency, support, and joint re-child, the child is treated as the qualifying
Test explained earlier. turn tests for both you and his father. Your AGI ischild of the person who had the highest
$12,000 and your son's father's AGI is $14,000.AGI for the year, but only if that person's
Example 6 Ðchild lived with both parents Your son's father agrees to let you claim theAGI is higher than the highest AGI of any
and grandparent. The facts are the same as child as a qualifying child. This means you canof the child's parents who can claim the
in Example 1 except that you and your daugh- claim him as a qualifying child for the depen-child. If the child's parents file a joint return
ter's father are married to each other, live with dency exemption, child tax credit, head ofwith each other, this rule can be applied
your daughter and your mother, and have AGI of household filing status, credit for child and de-by dividing the parents' combined AGI
$20,000 on a joint return. If you and your hus- pendent care expenses, exclusion for depen-equally between the parents. See Exam-
band do not claim your daughter as a qualifying dent care benefits, and the earned incomeple 6.
child, your mother can claim her instead. Even credit, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits
though the AGI on your joint return, $20,000, is (and if your son's father does not, in fact, claimSubject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the
more than your mother's AGI of $15,000, for this your son as a qualifying child for any of those taxother person may be able to choose which of
purpose each parent's AGI can be treated as benefits).you claims the child as a qualifying child.
$10,000, so your mother's $15,000 AGI is
treated as higher than the highest AGI of any of Example 10 Ðunmarried parents claimExample 1 Ðchild lived with parent and
the child's parents who can claim the child. same child. The facts are the same as ingrandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-
Example 9 except that you and your son's fatherter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are
Example 7 Ð separated parents. You, both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived case, only your son's father will be allowed toYour mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's father did together until August 1, 2010, when your hus- treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-not live with you or your daughter. The rule band moved out of the household. In August and cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI,explained earlier for children of divorced or sep- September, your son lived with you. For the rest $12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the childarated parents or parents who live apart does of the year, your son lived with your husband, tax credit, head of household filing status, creditnot apply. Jane is a qualifying child of both you the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child of for child and dependent care expenses, exclu-and your mother because she meets the rela- both you and your husband because your son sion for dependent care benefits, or the earnedtionship, age, residency, support, and joint re- lived with each of you for more than half the year income credit for your son, the IRS will disallowturn tests for both you and your mother. and because he met the relationship, age, sup- your claim to all these tax benefits, unless youHowever, only one of you can claim her. Jane is port, and joint return tests for both of you. At the have another qualifying child.not a qualifying child of anyone else, including end of the year, you and your husband still wereher father. You agree to let your mother claim not divorced, legally separated, or separated Example 11Ðchild did not live with a par-Jane. This means your mother can claim Jane under a written separation agreement, so the ent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis-as a qualifying child for the dependency exemp- rule for children of divorced or separated par- ter's child, lived with your mother all year. Yoution, child tax credit, head of household filing ents or parents who live apart does not apply. are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Yourstatus, credit for child and dependent care ex- You and your husband will file separate re- mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parentspenses, exclusion for dependent care benefits, turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, andand the earned income credit, if she qualifies for son as a qualifying child. This means, if your do not live with you or their child. Your niece is aeach of those tax benefits (and if you do not husband does not claim your son as a qualifying qualifying child of both you and your motherclaim Jane as a qualifying child for any of those child, you can claim your son as a qualifying because she meets the relationship, age, resi-tax benefits). child for the dependency exemption, child tax dency, support, and joint return tests for both
credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene- you and your mother. However, only yourExample 2 Ðparent has higher AGI than fits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits. mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This isgrandparent. The facts are the same as in However, you cannot claim head of household because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is moreExample 1 except your AGI is $18,000. Because filing status because you and your husband did than your AGI, $9,300.your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she not live apart for the last 6 months of the year. As
cannot claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane. Applying this special rule to divorced or sep-a result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
arated parents or parents who live apart. Ifrately, so you cannot claim the earned income
Example 3 Ð two persons claim same a child is treated as the qualifying child of thecredit or the credit for child and dependent care
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 noncustodial parent under the rules describedexpenses.
except that you and your mother both claim Jane earlier for children of divorced or separated par-
as a qualifying child. In this case, you as the ents or parents who live apart, only the noncus-Example 8 Ð separated parents claim
child's parent will be the only one allowed to todial parent can claim an exemption and thesame child. The facts are the same as in
claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will child tax credit for the child. However, the custo-Example 7 except that you and your husband
disallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene- dial parent, if eligible, or other eligible personboth claim your son as a qualifying child. In this
fits listed earlier unless she has another qualify- can claim the child as a qualifying child for headcase, only your husband will be allowed to treat
ing child. of household filing status, the credit for child andyour son as a qualifying child. This is because,
dependent care expenses, the exclusion for de-during 2010, the boy lived with him longer than
Example 4 Ðqualifying children split be- pendent care benefits, and the earned incomewith you. If you claimed an exemption, the child
tween two persons. The facts are the same credit. If the child is the qualifying child of moretax credit, or the exclusion for dependent care
as in Example 1 except you also have two other than one person for these benefits, then thebenefits for your son, the IRS will disallow your
young children who are qualifying children of tiebreaker rules will determine which person canclaim to all these tax benefits, unless you have
both you and your mother. Only one of you can treat the child as a qualifying child.another qualifying child. In addition, because
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI you and your husband did not live apart for the
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother Example 1. You and your 5-year-old sonlast 6 months of the year, your husband cannot
to claim one or more of the children. For exam- lived all year with your mother, who paid theclaim head of household filing status. As a re-
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can claim entire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI issult, his filing status is married filing separately,
the other two. $10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Yourso he cannot claim the earned income credit or
son's father did not live with you or your son.the credit for child and dependent care ex-
Example 5 Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifying Under the rules explained earlier for children ofpenses.
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 divorced or separated parents or parents who
except you are only 18 years old and did not live apart, your son is treated as the qualifyingExample 9 Ð unmarried parents. You,
provide more than half of your own support for child of his father, who can claim an exemptionyour 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived
and the child tax credit for him. Because of this,the year. This means you are your mother's together all year. You and your son's father are
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you cannot claim an exemption or the child tax This treatment applies for all years until the Example 3 Ð earned income credit
child is returned. However, the last year this claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-credit for your son. However, your son's father
treatment can apply is the earlier of: ple 2 except your friend had wages of $8,000cannot claim your son as a qualifying child for
during the year and claimed the earned incomehead of household filing status, the credit for
1. The year there is a determination that the credit on her return. Your friend's child is thechild and dependent care expenses, the exclu-
child is dead, or qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend),sion for dependent care benefits, or the earned
so you cannot claim your friend's child as yourincome credit. You and your mother did not have 2. The year the child would have reached
qualifying relative.any child care expenses or dependent care ben- age 18.
efits, but the boy is a qualifying child of both you Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who livesand your mother for head of household filing in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifyingstatus and the earned income credit because he relative, and you may be able to claim the childNot a Qualifying Child Testmeets the relationship, age, residency, support, as a dependent. If the child does not live withand joint return tests for both you and your you, the child does not meet the residency testA child is not your qualifying relative if the child ismother. (Note: The support test does not apply to be your qualifying child. If the persons theyour qualifying child or the qualifying child of anyfor the earned income credit.) However, you child does live with are not U.S. citizens andother taxpayer.agree to let your mother claim your son. This have no U.S. gross income, those persons aremeans she can claim him for head of household not ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifyingExample 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, whofiling status and the earned income credit if she child of any other taxpayer. If the child is not youris a full-time student, lives with you and meets allqualifies for each and if you do not claim him as qualifying child or the qualifying child of anythe tests to be your qualifying child. She is nota qualifying child for the earned income credit. other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela-your qualifying relative.(You cannot claim head of household filing sta- tive if the gross income test and the support testtus because your mother paid the entire cost of are met.Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives withkeeping up the home.) You cannot claim as a dependent a child whoyour parents and meets all the tests to be their
lives in a foreign country other than Canada orqualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-Example 2. The facts are the same as in Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S.tive.Example 1 except that your AGI is $25,000 and resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-your mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can- ception for certain adopted children who livedExample 3. Your son lives with you but isnot claim your son as a qualifying child for any with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test,not your qualifying child because he is 30 yearspurpose because her AGI is not higher than earlier.old and does not meet the age test. He may beyours. your qualifying relative if the gross income test
Example. You provide all the support ofand the support test are met.Example 3. The facts are the same as in your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live inExample 1 except that you and your mother both Mexico with your mother and have no income.Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandsonclaim your son as a qualifying child for the You are single and live in the United States.lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncleearned income credit. Your mother also claims Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has nofor 4 months, and with you for 5 months duringhim as a qualifying child for head of household U.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Yourthe year. He is not your qualifying child becausefiling status. You as the child's parent will be the children are not your qualifying children becausehe does not meet the residency test. He may beonly one allowed to claim your son as a qualify- they do not meet the residency test. Also, theyyour qualifying relative if the gross income testing child for the earned income credit. The IRS are not the qualifying children of any other tax-and the support test are met.will disallow your mother's claim to the earned payer, so they are your qualifying relatives andincome credit and head of household filing sta- Child of person not required to file a return. you can claim them as dependents if all the teststus unless she has another qualifying child. A child is not the qualifying child of any other are met. You may also be able to claim your
taxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifying mother as a dependent if all the tests are met,
relative if the child's parent (or other person for including the gross income test and the supportQualifying Relative whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) is test.
not required to file an income tax return andThere are four tests that must be met for a
either:person to be your qualifying relative. The four
tests are: Member of Household or• Does not file an income tax return, or
Relationship Test1. Not a qualifying child test, • Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid. To meet this test, a person must either:2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and 1. Live with you all year as a member of yourExample 1 Ðreturn not required. You household, or4. Support test. support an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old
child, who lived with you all year in your home. 2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed
Your friend has no gross income, is not required under Relatives who do not have to liveAge. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel- to file a 2010 tax return, and does not file a 2010 with you.ative can be any age. There is no age test for a tax return. Both your friend and her child are If at any time during the year the person wasqualifying relative. your qualifying relatives if the member of house- your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify-hold or relationship test, gross income test, and ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-Kidnapped child. You can treat a child as support test are met. tions, earlier.your qualifying relative even if the child has been
kidnapped, but both of the following statements Example 2 Ðreturn filed to claim refund. Relatives who do not have to live with you.
must be true. The facts are the same as in Example 1 except A person related to you in any of the following
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year ways does not have to live with you all year as a1. The child is presumed by law enforcement and had income tax withheld from her wages. member of your household to meet this test.authorities to have been kidnapped by She files a return only to get a refund of thesomeone who is not a member of your • Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-income tax withheld and does not claim thefamily or the child's family. scendant of any of them (for example,earned income credit or any other tax credits or your grandchild). (A legally adopted child2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the deductions. Both your friend and her child are is considered your child.)child met the tests to be your qualifying your qualifying relatives if the member of house-
relative for the part of the year before the hold or relationship test, gross income test, and • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
date of the kidnapping. support test are met. ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other Example. Your dependent mother died on • Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp- a political subdivision of a state or posses-• Your stepfather or stepmother. tion for a dependent were also met. You can sion, the United States, or the District of
claim an exemption for her on your return. Columbia.• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
• A brother or sister of your father or Local law violated. A person does not meet ªPermanently and totally disabledº has themother. this test if at any time during the year the rela- same meaning here as under Qualifying Child,
tionship between you and that person violates earlier.• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
local law.ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law,
or sister-in-law.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a Support Test (To Be a QualifyingAny of these relationships that were established member of your household all year. However, Relative)by marriage are not ended by death or divorce. your relationship with her violated the laws of the
state where you live, because she was married To meet this test, you generally must provide
Example. You and your wife began sup- to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet more than half of a person's total support during
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2004. this test and you cannot claim her as a depen- the calendar year.
Your wife died in 2009. In spite of your wife's dent. However, if two or more persons provide
death, your father-in-law continues to meet this support, but no one person provides more than
Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaystest, even if he does not live with you. You can half of a person's total support, see Multiple
treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedclaim him as a dependent if all other tests are Support Agreement, later.
childº includes a child who was lawfully placedmet, including the gross income test and support How to determine if support test is met.with you for legal adoption.test. You figure whether you have provided more
Foster child. A foster child is an individual than half of a person's total support by compar-Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he
who is placed with you by an authorized place- ing the amount you contributed to that person'sor she lives with you all year as a member of
support with the entire amount of support thatment agency or by judgment, decree, or other your household. A cousin is a descendant of a
person received from all sources. This includesorder of any court of competent jurisdiction. brother or sister of your father or mother.
support the person provided from his or her own
funds.Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per-
You may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur-Gross Income Testson can be related to either you or your spouse.
ing whether you provided more than half of aAlso, the person does not need to be related to
To meet this test, a person's gross income for person's support.the spouse who provides support. the year must be less than $3,650.For example, your spouse's uncle who re- Person's own funds not used for support.
Gross income defined. Gross income is allceives more than half of his support from you A person's own funds are not support unless
income in the form of money, property, andmay be your qualifying relative, even though he they are actually spent for support.
services that is not exempt from tax.does not live with you. However, if you and your
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min- Example. Your mother received $2,400 inspouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shecle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.with you all year as a member of your house-
neous income from the business. She put $300 in a savings account.hold.
Gross receipts from rental property are gross Even though your mother received a total of
income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to $2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400Temporary absences. A person is consid- determine the gross income from rental prop- ($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If youered to live with you as a member of your house- erty. spent more than $2,400 for her support and nohold during periods of time when one of you, or Gross income includes a partner's share of other support was received, you have providedboth, are temporarily absent due to special cir- the gross (not a share of the net) partnership more than half of her support.cumstances such as: income.
Child's wages used for own support. YouGross income also includes all taxable un-• Illness, cannot include in your contribution to youremployment compensation and certain scholar-• Education, child's support any support that is paid for by theship and fellowship grants. Scholarships
child with the child's own wages, even if you paidreceived by degree candidates that are used for• Business, the wages.tuition, fees, supplies, books, and equipment• Vacation, or required for particular courses may not be in- Year support is provided. The year you pro-cluded in gross income. For more information• Military service. vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifabout scholarships, see chapter 12. you do so with borrowed money that you repayTax-exempt income, such as certain socialIf the person is placed in a nursing home for in a later year.security benefits, is not included in gross in-an indefinite period of time to receive constant If you use a fiscal year to report your income,come.medical care, the absence may be considered you must provide more than half of the depen-
temporary. dent's support for the calendar year in whichDisabled dependent working at sheltered
your fiscal year begins.workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross
Death or birth. A person who died during the income test), the gross income of an individual Armed Forces dependency allotments. Theyear, but lived with you as a member of your who is permanently and totally disabled at any part of the allotment contributed by the govern-household until death, will meet this test. The time during the year does not include income for ment and the part taken out of your military paysame is true for a child who was born during the services the individual performs at a sheltered are both considered provided by you in figuringyear and lived with you as a member of your workshop. The availability of medical care at the whether you provide more than half of the sup-workshop must be the main reason for the indi-household for the rest of the year. The test is port. If your allotment is used to support personsvidual's presence there. Also, the income mustalso met if a child lived with you as a member of other than those you name, you can take thecome solely from activities at the workshop thatyour household except for any required hospital exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.are incident to this medical care.stay following birth.
A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:If your dependent died during the year and Example. You are in the Armed Forces.
you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption • Provides special instruction or training de- You authorize an allotment for your widowed
for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp- signed to alleviate the disability of the indi- mother that she uses to support herself and her
tion. vidual, and sister. If the allotment provides more than half of
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each person's support, you can take an exemp- Generally, the amount of an item of support Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging,
tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, is the amount of the expense incurred in provid- you are considered to provide support equal to
even though you authorize the allotment only for ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support the fair rental value of the room, apartment,
your mother. is the fair rental value of the lodging. house, or other shelter in which the person lives.
Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow-Expenses that are not directly related to anyTax-exempt military quarters allowances. ance for the use of furniture and appliances, andone member of a household, such as the cost ofThese allowances are treated the same way as for heat and other utilities that are provided.food for the household, must be divided amongdependency allotments in figuring support. The
the members of the household.allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow- Fair rental value defined. This is the
ance for quarters are both considered as pro- amount you could reasonably expect to receive
Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Maryvided by you for support. from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their used instead of actual expenses such as taxes,
two children. Grace gets social security benefits interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities,Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans- cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In sometotal support, include tax-exempt income, sav- portation, and recreation. Grace has no other cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rentings, and borrowed amounts used to support income. Frank and Mary's total food expense for paid.that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's If you provide the total lodging, the amount oftain social security benefits, welfare benefits, medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair support you provide is the fair rental value of thenontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is room the person uses, or a share of the fairForces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar rental value of the entire dwelling if the personand tax-exempt interest. rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-as follows: vide the total lodging, the total fair rental valueExample 1. You provide $4,000 toward
must be divided depending on how much of theyour mother's support during the year. She has
Fair rental value of lodging ..... . $ 1,800 total lodging you provide. If you provide only aearned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
part and the person supplies the rest, the faircurity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter- Clothing, transportation, and
rental value must be divided between both ofest of $200. She uses all these for her support. recreation ................. . 2,400
you according to the amount each provides.You cannot claim an exemption for your mother Medical expenses ........... . 1,200because the $4,000 you provide is not more
Example. Your parents live rent free in athan half of her total support of $9,600. Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .... . 1,040
house you own. It has a fair rental value ofTotal support .............. . $6,440 $5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairExample 2. Your brother's daughter takes
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay
for the furniture. This does not include heat andher college tuition. She is personally responsible
The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800 utilities. The house is completely furnished withfor the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total
lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040 furniture belonging to your parents. You paysupport. You cannot claim an exemption for her
food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace's $600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallybecause you provide less than half of her sup-
$6,440 total support. included in rent for houses in the area whereport.
your parents live. Therefore, you consider theSocial security benefits. If a husband and Example 2. Your parents live with you, your total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000wife each receive benefits that are paid by one spouse, and your two children in a house you ($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedcheck made out to both of them, half of the total own. The fair rental value of your parents' share house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-paid is considered to be for the support of each of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)spouse, unless they can show otherwise. which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa- of which you are considered to provide $4,200If a child receives social security benefits and ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, ($3,600 + $600).uses them toward his or her own support, the which he spends equally between your mother Person living in his or her own home. Thebenefits are considered as provided by the child. and himself for items of support such as cloth- total fair rental value of a person's home that heing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalSupport provided by the state (welfare, or she owns is considered support contributedfood expense for the household is $6,000. Yourfood stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro- by that person.heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Yourvided by the state to a needy person generally
mother has hospital and medical expenses of Living with someone rent free. If you liveare considered support provided by the state.
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure with a person rent free in his or her home, youHowever, payments based on the needs of the
your parents' total support as follows: must reduce the amount you provide for supportrecipient will not be considered as used entirely
of that person by the fair rental value of lodgingfor that person's support if it is shown that part of
he or she provides you.the payments were not used for that purpose. Support provided Father Mother
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum Property. Property provided as support isPension spent for theiradvance payment to a home for the aged to take measured by its fair market value. Fair marketsupport ............ . 2,100 2,100care of your relative for life and the payment is value is the price that property would sell for on
based on that person's life expectancy, the Share of food (1/6 of the open market. It is the price that would be
$6,000) ............ . 1,000 1,000amount of support you provide each year is the agreed upon between a willing buyer and a
lump-sum payment divided by the relative's life willing seller, with neither being required to act,Medical expenses forexpectancy. The amount of support you provide and both having reasonable knowledge of themother ............. . 600also includes any other amounts you provided relevant facts.
Parents' total support .. . $4,100 $4,700during the year. Capital expenses. Capital items, such as
furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtYou must apply the support test separately
for a person during the year can be included into each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000Total Support total support under certain circumstances.lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-
To figure if you provided more than half of a port of $4,100 ± less than half. You provide The following examples show when a capital
person's support, you must first determine the $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 item is or is not support.
total support provided for that person. Total sup- food, $600 medical) ± more than half of her total
port includes amounts spent to provide food, support of $4,700. You meet the support test for Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn
lodging, clothing, education, medical and dental your mother, but not your father. Heat and utility mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- costs are included in the fair rental value of the given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.
cessities. lodging, so these are not considered separately. Because the lawn mower benefits all members
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3-1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year. Do not include funds provided by the state; include those
amounts on line 23 instead ................................................. . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ..................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ..... . 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................ . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................ . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21. .......................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ............................................... . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ........ . 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................ . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ............................... . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ..................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ........................... . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............ . 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ...................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ..................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses .................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year .......... . 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support .............. . 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ...................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... . 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for
this person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or
separated parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children
of Divorced or Separated Parents or Parents Who Live Apart, or Kidnapped Child under Qualifying Relative.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the household, you cannot include the cost of 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid must keep for his records the signed statement
by persons from their own income. from the one agreeing not to take the exemption.the lawn mower in the support of your child.
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid byExample 2. You buy a $150 television set persons from their own income. as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child. Support Test for Children of
3. Life insurance premiums. The television set is placed in your child's bed- Divorced or Separated Parents or
room. You can include the cost of the television Parents Who Live Apart4. Funeral expenses. set in the support of your child.
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated5. Scholarships received by your child if your
Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and parents will be a qualifying child of one of thechild is a full-time student. 
register it in your name. You and your parents. See Children of divorced or separated6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be- parents or parents who live apart under Qualify-Assistance payments used for the supportcause you own the car and do not give it to your ing Child, earlier. However, if the child does notof the child who receives them.daughter but merely let her use it, you cannot meet the requirements to be a qualifying child of
include the cost of the car in your daughter's either parent, the child may be a qualifying rela-
total support. However, you can include in your tive of one of the parents. In that case, the
Multiple Support Agreementdaughter's support your out-of-pocket expenses following rules must be used in applying the
of operating the car for her benefit. support test.Sometimes no one provides more than half of A child will be treated as being the qualifyingthe support of a person. Instead, two or moreExample 4. Your 17-year-old son, using relative of his or her noncustodial parent if allpersons, each of whom would be able to takepersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- four of the following statements are true.the exemption but for the support test, togethervide all the rest of your son's support ± $4,000. provide more than half of the person's support.Since the car is bought and owned by your son, 1. The parents:
When this happens, you can agree that anythe car's fair market value ($4,500) must be
a. Are divorced or legally separated underone of you who individually provides more thanincluded in his support. Your son has provided
a decree of divorce or separate mainte-10% of the person's support, but only one, canmore than half of his own total support of $8,500 nance,claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying
ing relative. Each of the others must sign achild. You did not provide more than half of his b. Are separated under a written separa-statement agreeing not to claim the exemptiontotal support, so he is not your qualifying rela- tion agreement, orfor that year. The person who claims the exemp-tive. You cannot claim an exemption for your c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6tion must keep these signed statements for hisson. months of the year, whether or not theyor her records. A multiple support declaration
identifying each of the others who agreed not to are or were married.Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur- claim the exemption must be attached to theance premiums you pay, including premiums for return of the person claiming the exemption. 2. The child received over half of his or her
supplementary Medicare coverage, are in- Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can support for the year from the parents (and
cluded in the support you provide. be used for this purpose. the rules on multiple support agreements,
explained earlier, do not apply).Medical insurance benefits. Medical in- You can claim an exemption under a multiple
surance benefits, including basic and supple- support agreement for someone related to you 3. The child is in the custody of one or both
mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of or for someone who lived with you all year as a parents for more than half of the year.
support. member of your household.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
Tuition payments and allowances under the Example 1. You, your sister, and your two a. The custodial parent signs a writtenGI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the brothers provide the entire support of your declaration, discussed later, that he ormother for the year. You provide 45%, yourGI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while she will not claim the child as a depen-sister 35%, and your two brothers each providethey attend school are included in total support. dent for the year, and the noncustodial10%. Either you or your sister can claim an parent attaches this written declarationexemption for your mother. The other must signExample. During the year, your son re- to his or her return. (If the decree ora statement agreeing not to take an exemptionceives $2,200 from the government under the GI agreement went into effect after 1984for your mother. The one who claims the exemp-Bill. He uses this amount for his education. You and before 2009, see Post-1984 andtion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-provide the rest of his support ± $2,000. Be- pre-2009 divorce decree or separationtion, to his or her return and must keep thecause GI benefits are included in total support, agreement, later. If the decree or agree-statement signed by the other for his or heryour son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 + ment went into effect after 2008, seerecords. Because neither brother provides more$2,000). You have not provided more than half Post-2008 divorce decree or separationthan 10% of the support, neither can take theof his support. agreement, later.)exemption and neither has to sign a statement.
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-Child care expenses. If you pay someone to Example 2. You and your brother each pro- rate maintenance or written separationprovide child or dependent care, you can include vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. agreement that applies to 2010 statesthese payments in the amount you provided for The remaining 60% of her support is provided that the noncustodial parent can claimthe support of your child or disabled dependent, equally by two persons who are not related to the child as a dependent, the decree oreven if you claim a credit for the payments. For her. She does not live with them. Because more agreement was not changed after 1984information on the credit, see chapter 32. than half of her support is provided by persons to say the noncustodial parent cannot
who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one claim the child as a dependent, and theOther support items. Other items may be can take the exemption. noncustodial parent provides at leastconsidered as support depending on the facts in $600 for the child's support during theeach case. Example 3. Your father lives with you and year.receives 25% of his support from social security,
40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.Do Not Include cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your
The custodial parent is the parent with whom theuncle can take the exemption for your father ifin Total Support
child lived for the greater number of nights dur-the other signs a statement agreeing not to. The
The following items are not included in total ing the year. The other parent is the noncus-one who takes the exemption must attach Form
todial parent.support. 2120, or a similar declaration, to his return and
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the parents divorced or separated during 3. The years for which the noncustodial par- parents who never married and lived apart at all
ent, rather than the custodial parent, can times during the last 6 months of the year.the year and the child lived with both parents
claim the child as a dependent.before the separation, the custodial parent is the
one with whom the child lived for the greater The noncustodial parent must attach all of Multiple support agreement. If the support of
number of nights during the rest of the year. the following pages of the decree or agreement the child is determined under a multiple support
A child is treated as living with a parent for a to his or her tax return. agreement, this special support test for divorced
night if the child sleeps: or separated parents or parents who live apart• The cover page (write the other parent's does not apply.• At that parent's home, whether or not the social security number on this page).
parent is present, or • The pages that include all of the informa-
• In the company of the parent, when the tion identified in items (1) through (3)
above.child does not sleep at a parent's home Social Security
(for example, the parent and child are on • The signature page with the other parent'svacation together). Numbers forsignature and the date of the agreement.
Equal number of nights. If the child lived DependentsPost-2008 divorce decree or separation
with each parent for an equal number of nights agreement. The noncustodial parent can no
during the year, the custodial parent is the par- You must show the social security numberlonger attach pages from the decree or agree-
ent with the higher adjusted gross income. (SSN) of any dependent for whom you claim anment instead of Form 8332 if the decree or
exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your Formagreement went into effect after 2008. The cus-December 31. The night of December 31 is 1040 or Form 1040A.todial parent must sign either Form 8332 or atreated as part of the year in which it begins. For similar statement whose only purpose is to re- If you do not show the dependent'sexample, December 31, 2010, is treated as part lease the custodial parent's claim to an exemp- SSN when required or if you show anof 2010. tion for a child, and the noncustodial parent must incorrect SSN, the exemption may be
CAUTION
!Emancipated child. If a child is emanci- attach a copy to his or her return. The form or disallowed.pated under state law, the child is treated as not statement must release the custodial parent's
claim to the child without any conditions. Forliving with either parent.
example, the release must not depend on the No SSN. If a person for whom you expect toAbsences. If a child was not with either par- noncustodial parent paying support. claim an exemption on your return does notent on a particular night (because, for example, have an SSN, either you or that person shouldThe noncustodial parent must attachthe child was staying at a friend's house), the apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filingthe required information even if it waschild is treated as living with the parent with Form SS-5, Application for a Social Securityfiled with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!whom the child normally would have lived for Card, with the Social Security Administration
that night, except for the absence. But if it cannot (SSA). You can get Form SS-5 online at www.Revocation of release of claim to an ex-be determined with which parent the child nor- socialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA office.emption. The custodial parent can revoke amally would have lived or if the child would not  It usually takes about 2 weeks to get anrelease of claim to an exemption that he or shehave lived with either parent that night, the child SSN. If you do not have a required SSN by thepreviously released to the noncustodial parentis treated as not living with either parent that filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for anon Form 8332 or a similar statement. If thenight. extension of time to file.custodial parent provided, or made reasonable
efforts to provide, the noncustodial parent withParent works at night. If, due to a parent's Born and died in 2010. If your child was
written notice of the revocation in 2009, the born and died in 2010, and you do not have annighttime work schedule, a child lives for a
revocation can be effective no earlier than 2010. SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thegreater number of days but not nights with the
The custodial parent can use Part III of Form child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-parent who works at night, that parent is treated
8332 for this purpose and must attach a copy of pital records instead. The document must showas the custodial parent. On a school day, the
the revocation to his or her return for each tax the child was born alive. If you do this, enterchild is treated as living at the primary residence year he or she claims the child as a dependent ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your Formregistered with the school. as a result of the revocation. 1040 or Form 1040A.       
Written declaration.  The custodial parent Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement port provided by your new spouse is treated as Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-(containing the same information required by the provided by you. dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, youform) to make the written declaration to release must list the individual taxpayer identificationthe exemption to the noncustodial parent. The number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-Child support under pre-1985 agreement.noncustodial parent must attach a copy of the tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.All child support payments actually receivedform or statement to his or her tax return. from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985 Taxpayer identification numbers forThe exemption can be released for 1 year, agreement are considered used for the support aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-for a number of specified years (for example, of the child. resident alien who does not have and is notalternate years), or for all future years, as speci-
eligible to get an SSN, your dependent mustfied in the declaration. Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the apply for an individual taxpayer identification
noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for thePost-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree or number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) of
child's support. This amount is considered sup-separation agreement. If the divorce decree line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. To
port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifor separation agreement went into effect after apply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application for
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number.
than support.may be able to attach certain pages from the Taxpayer identification numbers fordecree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are adoptees. If you have a child who was placeddecree or agreement must state all three of the includible in the spouse's gross income as either with you by an authorized placement agency,following. alimony, separate maintenance payments, or you may be able to claim an exemption for the
similar payments from an estate or trust, are not child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an1. The noncustodial parent can claim the treated as a payment for the support of a depen- ITIN for the child, you must get an adoptionchild as a dependent without regard to any dent. taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for thecondition, such as payment of support. child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application
2. The custodial parent will not claim the child Parents who never married. This special rule for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending
as a dependent for the year. for divorced or separated parents also applies to U.S. Adoptions, for details.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 35

Page 38 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid for 2010. Also take credit for any ex- other expense allowances paid under a nonac-
cess social security or railroad retirement countable plan. See Supplemental Wages ,
tax withheld (discussed in chapter 37). later, for more information about reimburse-
4. ments and allowances paid under a nonac-• Underpayment penalty. If you did not countable plan.pay enough tax during the year, either If your income is low enough that you will notthrough withholding or by making esti- have to pay income tax for the year, you may bemated tax payments, you may have to payTax Withholding exempt from withholding. This is explaineda penalty. In most cases, the IRS can fig- under Exemption From Withholding, later.ure this penalty for you. See Underpay-
You can ask your employer to withhold in-ment Penalty for 2010 at the end of thisand Estimated come tax from noncash wages and other wageschapter. 
not subject to withholding. If your employer does
not agree to withhold tax, or if not enough isTax
withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, asUseful Items
discussed later under Estimated Tax for 2011.You may want to see:
What's New for 2011 Military retirees. Military retirement pay isPublication
treated in the same manner as regular pay for
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax income tax withholding purposes, even though itTax law changes for 2011. When you figure
is treated as a pension or annuity for other taxhow much income tax you want withheld from ❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax purposes.your pay and when you figure your estimated Withholding?
tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2011.
For information on the status of expiring tax Household workers. If you are a householdForm (and Instructions)
benefits for 2011, go to IRS.gov. worker, you can ask your employer to withhold
❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance income tax from your pay. A household worker is
Certificate an employee who performs household work in a
private home, local college club, local fraternity❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension or sorority chapter.or Annuity PaymentsReminders Tax is withheld only if you want it withheld
❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income Tax and your employer agrees to withhold it. If youEstimated tax safe harbor for higher income Withholding From Sick Pay do not have enough income tax withheld, youtaxpayers. If your 2010 adjusted gross in- may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Requestcome was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you later under Estimated Tax for 2011.are married filing a separate return), you must ❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
deposit the smaller of 90% of your expected tax ❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Farmworkers. Income tax generally is with-for 2011 or 110% of the tax shown on your 2010 Individuals, Estates, and Trusts held from your cash wages for work on a farmreturn to avoid an estimated tax penalty. unless your employer both:❏ 2210-F Underpayment of Estimated Tax
by Farmers and Fishermen • Pays you cash wages of less than $150
during the year, and
Introduction • Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-
taling less than $2,500 during the year.This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as
you earn or receive income during the year. In Tax Withholding 
general, the federal income tax is a Differential wage payments.  When employ-
pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay as ees are on leave from employment for militaryfor 2011
you go. duty, some employers may make up the differ-
ence between the military pay and civilian pay.This section discusses income tax withholding• Withholding. If you are an employee, Payments made after December 31, 2008, to anon:your employer probably withholds income employee who is on active duty for a period oftax from your pay. Tax also may be with- • Salaries and wages, more than 30 days, will be subject to income taxheld from certain other income, such as withholding, but not subject to social security or• Tips,pensions, bonuses, commissions, and Medicare taxes. The wages and withholding willgambling winnings. The amount withheld • Taxable fringe benefits, be reported on Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-is paid to the IRS in your name. ment.• Sick pay,
• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax • Pensions and annuities,through withholding, or do not pay enough
tax that way, you may have to pay esti- Determining Amount of Tax• Gambling winnings,
mated tax. People who are in business for Withheld Using Form W-4• Unemployment compensation, andthemselves generally will have to pay their
tax this way. Also, you may have to pay The amount of income tax your employer with-• Certain federal payments, such as social
estimated tax if you receive income such holds from your regular pay depends on twosecurity.
as dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, things.This section explains the rules for withholdingand royalties. Estimated tax is used to pay • The amount you earn in each payroll pe-tax from each of these types of income.not only income tax, but self-employment riod.tax and alternative minimum tax as well. This section also covers backup withholding
• The information you give your employeron interest, dividends, and other payments.
This chapter explains these methods. In addi- on Form W-4.
tion, it also explains the following. Salaries and Wages Form W-4 includes four types of information• Credit for withholding and estimated that your employer will use to figure your with-tax. When you file your 2010 income tax Income tax is withheld from the pay of most holding.return, take credit for all the income tax employees. Your pay includes your regular pay,
withheld from your salary, wages, pen- bonuses, commissions, and vacation al- • Whether to withhold at the single rate or at
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you lowances. It also includes reimbursements and the lower married rate.
Page 36 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 39 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• How many withholding allowances you Note. You cannot give your employer a pay- Getting the Right Amount of Tax
claim (each allowance reduces the ment to cover withholding on salaries and Withheldamount withheld). wages for past pay periods or a payment for
estimated tax. In most situations, the tax withheld from your• Whether you want an additional amount
pay will be close to the tax you figure on yourwithheld.
return if you follow these two rules.
• Whether you are claiming an exemption Completing Form W-4 and • You accurately complete all the Form W-4from withholding. See Exemption From Worksheets worksheets that apply to you.Withholding, later.
Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure • You give your employer a new Form W-4
how many withholding allowances you can when changes occur.Note. You must specify a filing status and a claim. The worksheets are for your own records.
number of withholding allowances on Form W-4. Do not give them to your employer. But because the worksheets and withholding
You cannot specify only a dollar amount of with- methods do not account for all possible situa-holding. Multiple jobs. If you have income from more tions, you may not be getting the right amount
than one job at the same time, complete only withheld. This is most likely to happen in the
one set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split your following situations.New Job allowances between the Forms W-4 for each • You are married and both you and yourjob. You cannot claim the same allowances withWhen you start a new job, you must fill out Form spouse work.more than one employer at the same time. YouW-4 and give it to your employer. Your employer can claim all your allowances with one employer • You have more than one job at a time.should have copies of the form. If you need to and none with the other(s), or divide them anychange the information later, you must fill out a • You have nonwage income, such as inter-other way.new form. est, dividends, alimony, unemployment
If you work only part of the year (for example, compensation, or self-employment in-Married individuals. If both you and youryou start working after the beginning of the come.spouse are employed and expect to file a jointyear), too much tax may be withheld. You may
return, figure your withholding allowances using • You will owe additional amounts with yourbe able to avoid overwithholding if your em-
your combined income, adjustments, deduc- return, such as self-employment tax.ployer agrees to use the part-year method. See
tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one setPart-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publication • Your withholding is based on obsoleteof worksheets. You can divide your total al-505 for more information. Form W-4 information for a substantiallowances any way, but you cannot claim an part of the year.Employee also receiving pension income. allowance that your spouse also claims.
If you receive pension or annuity income and • Your earnings are more than the amountIf you and your spouse expect to file sepa-
begin a new job, you will need to file Form W-4 shown under Check your withholding inrate returns, figure your allowances using sepa-
with your new employer. However, you can the instructions at the top of page 1 ofrate worksheets based on your own individual
choose to split your withholding allowances be- Form W-4.income, adjustments, deductions, exemptions,tween your pension and job in any manner. See and credits. • You work only part of the year.Publication 919 for more information.
• You change the number of your withhold-Alternative method of figuring withholding
ing allowances during the year.allowances. You do not have to use the FormChanging Your Withholding W-4 worksheets if you use a more accurate
method of figuring the number of withholding Cumulative wage method. If you change theDuring the year changes may occur to your
allowances. For more information, see Alterna- number of your withholding allowances duringmarital status, exemptions, adjustments, deduc-
tive method of figuring withholding allowancestions, or credits you expect to claim on your tax the year, too much or too little tax may have
under Completing Form W-4 and Worksheets inreturn. When this happens, you may need to been withheld for the period before you made
Publication 505, chapter 1.give your employer a new Form W-4 to change the change. You may be able to compensate for
your withholding status or number of al- this if your employer agrees to use the cumula-
Personal Allowances Worksheet. Use thelowances. tive wage withholding method for the rest of the
Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 ofIf the changes reduce the number of al- year. You must ask your employer in writing to
Form W-4 to figure your withholding allowanceslowances you are claiming or changes your mar- use this method.based on exemptions and any special al-ital status from married to single, you must give To be eligible, you must have been paid forlowances that apply.your employer a new Form W-4 within 10 days. the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4 weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.whenever you wish to change the number of Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet.
your withholding allowances for any other rea- Use this worksheet if you plan to itemize your
son. deductions, claim certain credits, or claim ad- Publication 919justments to the income on your 2011 tax returnChanging your withholding for 2012. If and you want to reduce your withholding. Also, To make sure you are getting the right amount ofevents in 2011 will decrease the number of your complete this worksheet when you have tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help youwithholding allowances for 2012, you must give changes to these items to see if you need to compare the total tax to be withheld during theyour employer a new Form W-4 by December 1, change your withholding. year with the tax you can expect to figure on2011. If the event occurs in December 2011, The Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet your return. It also will help you determine howsubmit a new Form W-4 within 10 days. is on page 2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publica- much additional withholding, if any, is needed
tion 505 explains this worksheet. each payday to avoid owing tax when you file
your return. If you do not have enough tax with-Checking Your Withholding Two-Earners/Multiple Jobs Worksheet. held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as
You may need to complete this worksheet if youAfter you have given your employer a Form W-4, explained under Estimated Tax for 2011, later.
have more than one job, a working spouse, oryou can check to see whether the amount of tax
are also receiving a pension. Also, on line 8 ofwithheld from your pay is too little or too much.
this worksheet you can add any additional with-See Publication 919 , later. If too much or too Rules Your Employer Must Follow
holding necessary to cover any amount you ex-little tax is being withheld, you should give your
pect to owe other than income tax, such as It may be helpful for you to know some of theemployer a new Form W-4 to change your with-
self-employment tax.holding. withholding rules your employer must follow.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 37

Page 40 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
These rules can affect how to fill out your Form If you claim exemption, but later your situa- TipsW-4 and how to handle problems that may arise. tion changes so that you will have to pay income
tax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within The tips you receive while working on your jobNew Form W-4. When you start a new job, 10 days after the change. If you claim exemption are considered part of your pay. You must in-your employer should give you a Form W-4 to fill in 2011, but you expect to owe income tax for clude your tips on your tax return on the sameout. Beginning with your first payday, your em- 2012, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem- line as your regular pay. However, tax is notployer will use the information you give on the ber 1, 2011. withheld directly from tip income, as it is fromform to figure your withholding. your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employerYour claim of exempt status may be re-If you later fill out a new Form W-4, your will take into account the tips you report whenviewed by the IRS.employer can put it into effect as soon as possi- figuring how much to withhold from your regularble. The deadline for putting it into effect is the An exemption is good for only 1 year. pay.start of the first payroll period ending 30 or more You must give your employer a new Form W-4 See chapter 6  for information on reportingdays after you turn it in. by February 15 each year to continue your ex- your tips to your employer. For more information
emption.No Form W-4. If you do not give your em- on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-
ployer a completed Form W-4, your employer lication 531, Reporting Tip Income.
must withhold at the highest rate, as if you were
Supplemental Wages How employer figures amount to withhold.single and claimed no withholding allowances.
The tips you report to your employer are countedSupplemental wages include bonuses, commis-Repaying withheld tax. If you find you are as part of your income for the month you report
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer-having too much tax withheld because you did them. Your employer can figure your withholding
tain sick pay, and expense allowances undernot claim all the withholding allowances you are in either of two ways.
certain plans. The payer can figure withholdingentitled to, you should give your employer a new
• By withholding at the regular rate on theForm W-4. Your employer cannot repay any of on supplemental wages using the same method sum of your pay plus your reported tips.the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the used for your regular wages. However, if these
full amount withheld when you file your tax re- payments are identified separately from your • By withholding at the regular rate on your
turn. regular wages, your employer or other payer of pay plus a percentage of your reported
However, if your employer has withheld tips.supplemental wages can withhold income tax
more than the correct amount of tax for the Form from these wages at a flat rate.
W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill out
Not enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu-a new Form W-4 to have your withholding low-
lar pay is not enough for your employer to with-Expense allowances. Reimbursements orered to the correct amount. Your employer can
hold all the tax (including income tax and socialother expense allowances paid by your em-repay the amount that was withheld incorrectly.
security and Medicare taxes (or the equivalentployer under a nonaccountable plan are treatedIf you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect
railroad retirement tax)) due on your pay plusas supplemental wages.the full amount actually withheld, which you
your tips, you can give your employer money towould claim when you file your tax return. Reimbursements or other expense al- cover the shortage. See Giving your employerlowances paid under an accountable plan that money for taxes in chapter 6.are more than your proven expenses are treated
Exemption From Withholding as paid under a nonaccountable plan if you do Allocated tips. Your employer should not
not return the excess payments within a reason- withhold income tax, social security tax, Medi-If you claim exemption from withholding, your able period of time. care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-employer will not withhold federal income tax
cated tips. Withholding is based only on yourFor more information about accountable andfrom your wages. The exemption applies only to
pay plus your reported tips. Your employernonaccountable expense allowance plans, seeincome tax, not to social security or Medicare
should refund to you any incorrectly withheldtax. Reimbursements in chapter 26.
tax. See Allocated Tips  in chapter 6 for moreYou can claim exemption from withholding
information.for 2011 only if both of the following situations
apply. Penalties
Taxable Fringe Benefits• For 2010 you had a right to a refund of all You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both offederal income tax withheld because you the following apply. The value of certain noncash fringe benefits youhad no tax liability. receive from your employer is considered part of• You make statements or claim withholding• For 2011 you expect a refund of all federal your pay. Your employer generally must with-allowances on your Form W-4 that reduceincome tax withheld because you expect hold income tax on these benefits from yourthe amount of tax withheld.to have no tax liability. regular pay.
• You have no reasonable basis for those For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe
statements or allowances at the time you Benefits under Employee Compensation inStudents. If you are a student, you are not prepare your Form W-4. chapter 5.automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to find out if
Although the value of your personal use of anyou must file a return. If you work only part time There is also a criminal penalty for willfully employer-provided car, truck, or other highwayor only during the summer, you may qualify for supplying false or fraudulent information on your motor vehicle is taxable, your employer canexemption from withholding. Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa- choose not to withhold income tax on that
tion that would increase the amount withheld.Age 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or older amount. Your employer must notify you if this
The penalty upon conviction can be either a fineor blind, use Worksheet 1-3 or 1-4 in chapter 1 of choice is made.
Publication 505, to help you decide if you qualify of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year, For more information on withholding on tax-for exemption from withholding. Do not use ei- or both. able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publicationther worksheet if you will itemize deductions, These penalties will apply if you deliberately 505.claim exemptions for dependents, or claim tax and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-credits on your 2011 return. Instead, see Itemiz- tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold- Sick Paying deductions or claiming exemptions or credits ing of taxes. A simple error or an honest mistakein chapter 1 of Publication 505. will not result in one of these penalties. For Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your
example, a person who has tried to figure theClaiming exemption from withholding. To regular wages while you are temporarily absent
number of withholding allowances correctly, butclaim exemption, you must give your employer a from work due to sickness or personal injury. To
claims seven when the proper number is six, willForm W-4. Do not complete lines 5 and 6. Enter qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan
not be charged a W-4 penalty.ªExemptº on line 7. to which your employer is a party.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 41 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive sick pay from your employer or 3. Commodity credit corporation loans youGambling Winningsan agent of your employer, income tax must be choose to include in your gross income,
withheld. An agent who does not pay regular andIncome tax is withheld at a flat rate from certainwages to you may choose to withhold income kinds of gambling winnings. 4. Payments under the Agricultural Act oftax at a flat rate. 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), asAt the time this publication went toHowever, if you receive sick pay from a third amended, or title II of the Disaster Assis-print, Congress was considering legis-party who is not acting as an agent of your tance Act of 1988, that are treated as in-lation that would extend the currentemployer, income tax will be withheld only if you
CAUTION
! surance proceeds and that you receiverate of 25%. To find out if this legislation waschoose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S , because:enacted, and for more details, go to www.irs.below.
gov/formspubs.If you receive payments under a plan in a. Your crops were destroyed or damaged
which your employer does not participate (such Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 from by drought, flood, or any other natural
as an accident or health plan where you paid all the following sources are subject to income tax disaster, or
the premiums), the payments are not sick pay withholding. b. You were unable to plant crops be-and usually are not taxable. • Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, includ- cause of a natural disaster described in
ing payments made to winners of poker (a).Union agreements. If you receive sick pay
tournaments; or lottery.under a collective bargaining agreement be-
To make this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or atween your union and your employer, the agree- • Any other wager, if the proceeds are at similar form provided by the payer) and give it toment may determine the amount of income tax least 300 times the amount of the bet. the payer.withholding. See your union representative or
It does not matter whether your winnings are If you do not choose to have income taxyour employer for more information.
paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win- withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.
nings not paid in cash are taken into account atForm W-4S. If you choose to have income tax See Estimated Tax for 2011, later.
their fair market value.withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, such If you do not pay enough tax, either through
as an insurance company, you must fill out Form withholding or estimated tax, or a combination ofException. Gambling winnings from bingo,W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you both, you may have to pay a penalty. For infor-keno, and slot machines generally are not sub-can use to figure the amount you want withheld. mation, see Underpayment Penalty for 2010  atject to income tax withholding. However, youThey also explain restrictions that may apply. the end of this chapter.may need to provide the payer with a socialGive the completed form to the payer of your security number to avoid withholding. See More information. For more informationsick pay. The payer must withhold according to Backup withholding on gambling winnings in about the tax treatment of social security andyour directions on the form. chapter 1 of Publication 505. If you receive gam- railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Get
bling winnings not subject to withholding, you Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, for infor-Estimated tax. If you do not request withhold- may need to pay estimated tax. See Estimated mation about the tax treatment of commoditying on Form W-4S, or if you do not have enough Tax for 2011, later. credit corporation loans or crop disaster pay-tax withheld, you may have to make estimated
If you do not pay enough tax, either through ments.tax payments. If you do not pay enough tax,
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination ofeither through estimated tax or withholding, or a
both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-combination of both, you may have to pay a Backup Withholdingderpayment Penalty for 2010  at the end of thispenalty. See Underpayment Penalty for 2010 at
chapter.the end of this chapter. Banks or other businesses that pay you certain
kinds of income must file an information returnForm W-2G. If a payer withholds income tax (Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re-Pensions and Annuities from your gambling winnings, you should re- turn shows how much you were paid during theceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win- year. It also includes your name and taxpayerIncome tax usually will be withheld from your nings, showing the amount you won and the identification number (TIN). TINs are explainedpension or annuity distributions unless you amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on line in chapter 1 under Social Security Number.choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies 61 of Form 1040. These payments generally are not subject toto distributions from:
withholding. However, ªbackupº withholding is
• A traditional individual retirement arrange- required in certain situations. Backup withhold-Unemploymentment (IRA); ing can apply to most kinds of payments that areCompensation reported on Form 1099.• A life insurance company under an en-
The payer must withhold at a flat rate in thedowment, annuity, or life insurance con- You can choose to have income tax withheld following situations.tract; from unemployment compensation. To make
this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a similar form • You do not give the payer your TIN in the• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan; provided by the payer) and give it to the payer. required manner.
• A stock bonus plan; and All unemployment compensation is taxable. • The IRS notifies the payer that the TINSo, if you do not have income tax withheld, you• Any other plan that defers the time you you gave is incorrect.may have to pay estimated tax. See Estimatedreceive compensation.
• You are required, but fail, to certify thatTax for 2011, later.
you are not subject to backup withholding.If you do not pay enough tax, either throughThe amount withheld depends on whether
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination ofyou receive payments spread out over more • The IRS notifies the payer to start with-both, you may have to pay a penalty. For infor-than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 year holding on interest or dividends becausemation, see Underpayment Penalty for 2010  at(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo- you have underreported interest or divi-the end of this chapter.ver distribution (ERD). Income tax withholding dends on your income tax return. The IRS
from an ERD is mandatory. will do this only after it has mailed you four
notices over at least a 210-day period.Federal PaymentsMore information. For more information on
taxation of annuities and distributions (including You can choose to have income tax withheldERDs) from qualified retirement plans, see At the time this publication went tofrom certain federal payments you receive.chapter 10. For information on IRAs, see chap- print, Congress was considering legis-These payments are:ter 17. For more information on withholding on lation that would extend the current
CAUTION
!
pensions and annuities, including a discussion rate of 28%. To find out if this legislation was1. Social security benefits,
of Form W-4P, see Pensions and Annuities in enacted, and for more details, go to www.irs.
2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,chapter 1 of Publication 505. gov/formspubs.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Page 42 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2011 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
refundable credits* from your
total tax? (Do not subtract
any estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and refundable
credits* be at least 100%** of
the tax shown on your 2010
tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and refundable
credits* be at least 90%
(66
2⁄3 % for farmers and
fishermen) of the tax shown on
your 2011 tax return? Note. Your 2010 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
*Use the refundable credits shown on the 2011 Estimated Tax Worksheet, line 13b.
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
**110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2010 and 2011 is from farming or fishing and your
2010 adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2011 is married filing a separate return).
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Pub- your withholding or make estimated tax pay-Who Does Not Have To ments.lication 505 for more information.
Pay Estimated Tax
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal- General rule. In most cases, you must payIf you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid estimated tax for 2011 if both of the followingties for giving false information to avoid backup having to pay estimated tax by asking your em- apply.withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi- ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. Tonal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to 1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxdo this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer.$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both. for 2011, after subtracting your withholdingSee chapter 1 of Publication 505.
and refundable credits.
Estimated tax not required. You do not have 2. You expect your withholding plus your re-
to pay estimated tax for 2011 if you meet all fundable credits to be less than the smallerEstimated Tax for 2011 three of the following conditions. of:
• You had no tax liability for 2010.Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your
income that is not subject to withholding. This • You were a U.S. citizen or resident for the 2011 tax return, or
includes income from self-employment, interest, whole year. b. 100% of the tax shown on the yourdividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of 2010 tax return (but see Special rules• Your 2010 tax year covered a 12-monthassets, prizes, and awards. You also may have for farmers, fishermen, and higher in-period.to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax come taxpayers below). Your 2010 taxbeing withheld from your salary, pension, or return must cover all 12 months.You had no tax liability for 2010 if your total taxother income is not enough. was zero or you did not have to file an incomeEstimated tax is used to pay both income tax tax return. For the definition of ªtotal tax,º see If the result from using the general ruleand self-employment tax, as well as other taxes Total tax for 2010Ðline 14b in Publication 505, above suggests that you will not haveand amounts reported on your tax return. If you chapter 2. enough withholding, complete the
CAUTION
!do not pay enough tax, either through withhold- 2011 Estimated Tax Worksheet in the instruc-ing or estimated tax, or a combination of both, tions to Form 1040-ES for a more accurate cal-Who Must Pay Estimatedyou may have to pay a penalty. If you do not pay culation.enough by the due date of each payment period Tax
(see When To Pay Estimated Tax , later), you Special rules for farmers, fishermen, and
If you owe additional tax for 2010, you may havemay be charged a penalty even if you are due a higher income taxpayers. If at least
to pay estimated tax for 2011.refund when you file your tax return. For infor- two-thirds of your gross income for 2010 or 2011
mation on when the penalty applies, see Un- You can use the following general rule as a is from farming or fishing, substitute 66 2/3% for
derpayment Penalty for 2010  at the end of this guide during the year to see if you will have 90% in (2a) under the General rule , earlier. If
chapter. enough withholding, or if you should increase your AGI for 2010 was more than $150,000
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 43 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($75,000 if your filing status for 2011 is married was Heather's. For 2011, they plan to file mar- January payment. If you file your 2011 Form
filing a separate return), substitute 110% for ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of the 1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2012, and
100% in (2b) under General rule , earlier. See tax on the 2010 joint return as follows. pay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need
Figure 4-A above, and Publication 505, chapter to make the payment due on January 17, 2012.
Tax on $40,100 based on a2 for more information.
separate return ........ . $6,213 Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year does
Tax on $8,400 based on aAliens. Resident and nonresident aliens also not start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ESseparate return ........ .  845may have to pay estimated tax. Resident aliens instructions for your payment due dates.Total ................. . $ 7,058should follow the rules in this chapter unless
Joe's percentage of total ($6,213noted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should get
÷  $7,058) ............ . 88.03%Form 1040-ES (NR), U.S. Estimated Tax for When To StartJoe's share of tax on joint return Nonresident Alien Individuals.
($6,441 ×  88.03%) ...... . $ 5,670 You do not have to make estimated tax pay-You are an alien if you are not a citizen or
ments until you have income on which you willnational of the United States. You are a resident
owe the tax. If you have income subject to esti-alien if you either have a green card or meet the
How To Figure mated tax during the first payment period, yousubstantial presence test. For more information
must make your first payment by the due dateabout the substantial presence test, see Publi- Estimated Tax for the first payment period. You can pay all yourcation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it inTo figure your estimated tax, you must figureMarried taxpayers. If you qualify to make joint installments. If you choose to pay in install-your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), tax-estimated tax payments, apply the rules dis- ments, make your first payment by the due dateable income, taxes, deductions, and credits forcussed here to your joint estimated income. for the first payment period. Make your remain-the year.You and your spouse can make joint esti- ing installment payments by the due dates forWhen figuring your 2011 estimated tax, itmated tax payments even if you are not living the later periods.may be helpful to use your income, deductions,together. and credits for 2010 as a starting point. Use yourHowever, you and your spouse cannot make No income subject to estimated tax during2010 federal tax return as a guide. You can usejoint estimated tax payments if: first period. If you do not have income subjectForm 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax. to estimated tax until a later payment period, youNonresident aliens use Form 1040-ES (NR) to• You are legally separated under a decree must make your first payment by the due datefigure estimated tax (see chapter 8 of Publica-of divorce or separate maintenance, for that period. You can pay your entire esti-tion 519 for more information).• You and your spouse have different tax mated tax by the due date for that period or youYou must make adjustments both foryears, or can pay it in installments by the due date for thatchanges in your own situation and for recent period and the due dates for the remaining peri-• Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un- changes in the tax law. For 2011, there are ods. The following chart shows when to makeless that spouse elected to be treated as a several changes in the law. For a discussion of installment payments.resident alien for tax purposes (see chap- these changes, visit IRS.gov.
ter 1 of Publication 519)). Form 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help If you first have
income on which Make a Make lateryou figure your estimated tax. Keep the work-
you must pay payment installmentsIf you do not qualify to make joint estimated sheet for your records.
estimated tax: by:* by:*tax payments, apply these rules to your sepa- For more complete information and exam-
rate estimated income. Making joint or separate Before April 1 April 15 June 15ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2011,
estimated tax payments will not affect your Sept. 15see chapter 2 of Publication 505.
Jan. 15 next yearchoice of filing a joint tax return or separate
returns for 2011. April 1 ± May 31 June 15 Sept. 15When To Pay Estimated Jan. 15 next year2010 separate returns and 2011 joint re-
Taxturn. If you plan to file a joint return with your June 1 ± Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15 next year
spouse for 2011, but you filed separate returns For estimated tax purposes, the tax year is di- After Aug. 31 Jan. 15 (None)for 2010, your 2010 tax is the total of the tax
next yearvided into four payment periods. Each periodshown on your separate returns. You filed a has a specific payment due date. If you do notseparate return if you filed as single, head of *See January payment and Saturday, Sunday,pay enough tax by the due date of each payment holiday rule, earlier.household, or married filing separately. period, you may be charged a penalty even if
2010 joint return and 2011 separate re- you are due a refund when you file your income
How much to pay to avoid a penalty. Toturns. If you plan to file a separate return for tax return. The payment periods and due dates
determine how much you should pay by each2011 but you filed a joint return for 2010, your for estimated tax payments are shown next.
payment due date, see How To Figure Each2010 tax is your share of the tax on the joint
Payment, next.return. You file a separate return if you file as For the period:  Due date:
single, head of household, or married filing sep-
arately. Jan. 1 ± March 31 ... . April 18, 2011* How To Figure To figure your share of the tax on the joint April 1 ± May 31 .... . June 15, 2011
Each Paymentreturn, first figure the tax both you and your June 1 ± August 31 .. . Sept. 15, 2011
spouse would have paid had you filed separate Sept. 1± Dec. 31 .... . Jan. 17, 2012*, **
You should pay enough estimated tax by thereturns for 2010 using the same filing status as
*See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule below. due date of each payment period to avoid afor 2011. Then multiply the tax on the joint return **See January payment below. penalty for that period. You can figure your re-by the following fraction. 
quired payment for each period by using either
The tax you would have paid had the regular installment method or the annualizedSaturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due
you filed a separate return income installment method. These methods aredate for an estimated tax payment falls on a
described in chapter 2 of Publication 505. If youSaturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the paymentThe total tax you and your spouse do not pay enough during each payment period,will be on time if you make it on the next day thatwould have paid had you filed
you may be charged a penalty even if you areis not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.separate returns
due a refund when you file your tax return.In 2011, April 15 is Friday and a holiday in
Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re- the District of Columbia; therefore, the payment If the earlier discussion of No income subject
turn for 2010 showing taxable income of is due Monday, April 18th. In 2012, January 15 is to estimated tax during first period  or the later
$48,500 and a tax of $6,441. Of the $48,500 a Sunday and Monday is a holiday. The January discussion of Change in estimated tax applies to
taxable income, $40,100 was Joe's and the rest 15 payment is due by January 17, 2012. you, you may benefit from reading Annualized
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income Installment Method in chapter 2 of Publi- year. You also cannot use that overpayment in
cation 505 for information on how to avoid a any other way. Credit for Withholdingpenalty.
and Estimated Tax Underpayment penalty. Under the regular in- Pay by Check or Money Orderstallment method, if your estimated tax payment Using the Estimated Tax for 2010for any period is less than one-fourth of your
Payment Voucherestimated tax, you may be charged a penalty for
When you file your 2010 income tax return, takeunderpayment of estimated tax for that period Each payment of estimated tax by check or credit for all the income tax and excess socialwhen you file your tax return. Under the annual- money order must be accompanied by a pay- security or railroad retirement tax withheld fromized income installment method, your estimated ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. If you made your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also taketax payments vary with your income, but the estimated tax payments last year and did not credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2010.amount required must be paid each period. See use a paid preparer to file your return, you These credits are subtracted from your tax. Be-chapter 4 of Publication 505 for more informa- should receive a copy of the 2011 Form cause these credits are refundable, you shouldtion. 1040-ES in the mail. It will contain payment file a return and claim these credits, even if you
vouchers preprinted with your name, address,Change in estimated tax. After you make an do not owe tax.
and social security number. Using the preprintedestimated tax payment, changes in your income, Two or more employers. If you had two orvouchers will speed processing, reduce theadjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptions more employers in 2010 and were paid wages ofchance of error, and help save processing costs.may make it necessary for you to refigure your more than $106,800, too much social security orUse the window envelopes that came withestimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your tier 1 railroad retirement tax may have beenyour Form 1040-ES package. If you use youramended estimated tax by the next payment withheld from your wages. You may be able toown envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-due date after the change or in installments by claim the excess as a credit against your incomement vouchers to the address shown in thethat date and the due dates for the remaining tax when you file your return. See Credit forForm 1040-ES instructions for the place wherepayment periods. Excess Social Security Tax or Railroad Retire-you live.
ment Tax Withheld in chapter 37.If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
can order Form 1040-ES from the IRS (seeEstimated Tax Payments
inside back cover of this publication) or WithholdingNot Required download it from IRS.gov. Follow the instruc-
tions in the package to make sure you use the If you had income tax withheld during 2010, youYou do not have to pay estimated tax if your
vouchers correctly. should be sent a statement by January 31, 2011,withholding in each payment period is at least as
showing your income and the tax withheld. De-much as: Do not use the address shown in the pending on the source of your income, youForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruc-• One-fourth of your required annual pay- should receive:tions.ment, or
CAUTION
!
• Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,If you file a joint return and are making joint• Your required annualized income install-
estimated tax payments, enter the names and • Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,ment for that period.
social security numbers on the payment voucher orYou also do not have to pay estimated tax if you in the same order as they will appear on the joint • A form in the 1099 series.will pay enough through withholding to keep the return.
amount you owe with your return under $1,000.
Change of address. You must notify the IRS Forms W-2 and W-2G. Always file Form W-2if you are making estimated tax payments and with your income tax return. File Form W-2GHow To Pay Estimated Tax you changed your address during the year. with your return only if it shows any federalSend a clear and concise written statement toThere are five ways to pay estimated tax. income tax withheld from your winnings.the Internal Revenue Service Center where you You should get at least two copies of eachfiled your last return and provide all of the follow-• Credit an overpayment on your 2010 re- form you receive. Attach one copy to the front ofing.turn to your 2011 estimated tax. your federal income tax return. Keep one copy
• Your full name (and spouse's full name).• Send in your payment (check or money for your records. You also should receive copies
order) with a payment voucher from Form to file with your state and local returns.• Your signature (and spouse's signature).1040-ES.
• Your old address (and spouse's old ad-• Pay electronically using the Electronic dress if different). Form W-2Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS).
• Your new address. Your employer is required to provide or send• Pay by electronic funds withdrawal if you
Form W-2 to you no later than January 31, 2011.• Your social security number (and spouse'sare filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A elec-
You should receive a separate Form W-2 fromsocial security number).tronically.
each employer you worked for.You can use Form 8822, Change of Address, for• Pay by credit or debit card using a If you stopped working before the end ofthis purpose.pay-by-phone system or the Internet. 2010, your employer could have given you your
Form W-2 at any time after you stopped working.
Pay Electronically However, your employer must provide or send itCredit an Overpayment
to you by January 31, 2011.If you want to make estimated payments byIf you show an overpayment of tax after complet- If you ask for the form, your employer mustusing EFTPS, by electronic funds withdrawal, oring your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 2010, send it to you within 30 days after receiving yourby credit or debit card, go to www.irs.gov/e-pay.you can apply part or all of it to your estimated written request or within 30 days after your final
tax for 2011. On line 75 of Form 1040, or line 47 wage payment, whichever is later.
of Form 1040A, enter the amount you want If you have not received your Form W-2 on
credited to your estimated tax rather than re- time, you should ask your employer for it. If you
funded. Take the amount you have credited into do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS.
account when figuring your estimated tax pay- Form W-2 shows your total pay and other
ments. compensation and the income tax, social secur-
You cannot have any of the amount you ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-
credited to your estimated tax refunded to you ing the year. Include the federal income tax
until you file your tax return for the following withheld (as shown in box 2 of Form W-2) on:
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Line 61 if you file Form 1040, Backup withholding. If you were subject to 2009 that you had credited to your 2010 esti-
backup withholding on income you received dur- mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form• Line 38 if you file Form 1040A, or ing 2010, include the amount withheld, as 1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot use
• Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ. shown in box 4 of your Form 1099, in the total on Form 1040EZ.
line 61 of Form 1040, line 38 of Form 1040A, orIn addition, Form W-2 is used to report any Name changed. If you changed your name,line 7 of Form 1040EZ.taxable sick pay you received and any income and you made estimated tax payments using
tax withheld from your sick pay. your old name, attach a brief statement to the
front of your tax return indicating:Form Not CorrectForm W-2G • When you made the payments,If you receive a form with incorrect information
If you had gambling winnings in 2010, the payer on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected • The amount of each payment,
may have withheld income tax. If tax was with- form. Call the telephone number or write to the • The IRS address to which you sent theheld, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show- address given for the payer on the form. The payments,ing the amount you won and the amount of tax corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive
withheld. will have an ªXº in the ªCORRECTEDº box at the • Your name when you made the payments,
top of the form. A special form, Form W-2c, andReport the amounts you won on line 21 of
Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, is used toForm 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld on • Your social security number.correct a Form W-2.line 61 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win- The statement should cover payments youIn certain situations, you will receive twonings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot use made jointly with your spouse as well as any youforms in place of the original incorrect form. ThisForm 1040A or Form 1040EZ. made separately.will happen when your taxpayer identification
number is wrong or missing, your name and
address are wrong, or you received the wrong Separate ReturnsThe 1099 Series type of form (for example, a Form 1099-DIV
If you and your spouse made separate esti-instead of a Form 1099-INT). One new form youMost forms in the 1099 series are not filed with mated tax payments for 2010 and you file sepa-receive will be the same incorrect form or haveyour return. These forms should be furnished to rate returns, you can take credit only for yourthe same incorrect information, but all moneyyou by January 31, 2011 (or, for Forms 1099-B, own payments.amounts will be zero. This form will have an ªXº1099-S, and certain Forms 1099-MISC, by Feb- If you made joint estimated tax payments,in the ªCORRECTEDº box at the top of the form.ruary 15, 2011). Unless instructed to file any of you must decide how to divide the paymentsThe second new form should have all the correctthese forms with your return, keep them for your between your returns. One of you can claim allinformation, prepared as though it is the originalrecords. There are several different forms in this of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or(the ªCORRECTEDº box will not be checked).series, including: you can divide it in any other way you agree on.
If you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and
ments in proportion to each spouse's individualForm Received After FilingBarter Exchange Transactions;
tax as shown on your separate returns for 2010.
• Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt; If you file your return and you later receive a
form for income that you did not include on your• Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
return, you should report the income and take Divorced Taxpayerstions; credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form
• Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay- If you made joint estimated tax payments for1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
ments; 2010, and you were divorced during the year,Return.
either you or your former spouse can claim all of• Form 1099-INT, Interest Income; the joint payments, or you each can claim part of
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income; them. If you cannot agree on how to divide theSeparate Returns
payments, you must divide them in proportion to• Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount; If you are married but file a separate return, you each spouse's individual tax as shown on your
can take credit only for the tax withheld from• Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualified separate returns for 2010.
your own income. Do not include any amountEducation Programs; If you claim any of the joint payments on your
withheld from your spouse's income. However, tax return, enter your former spouse's social• Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen- different rules may apply if you live in a commu- security number (SSN) in the space provided onsions, Annuities, Retirement or nity property state. the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Community property states are listed in divorced and remarried in 2010, enter your pres-Contracts, etc.; chapter 2. For more information on these rules, ent spouse's SSN in that space and write your
and some exceptions, see Publication 555,• Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real Estate former spouse's SSN, followed by ªDIV,º to the
Community Property. left of Form 1040, line 62, or Form 1040A, lineTransactions;
39.• Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit
Statement; and Fiscal Years
• Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail-
If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscalroad Retirement Board. Underpayment Penaltyyear (a 12-month period ending on the last day
of any month except December), you must fol-If you received the types of income reported for 2010low special rules to determine your credit foron some forms in the 1099 series, you may not federal income tax withholding. For a discussionbe able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ. If you did not pay enough tax, either throughof how to take credit for withholding on a fiscalSee the instructions to these forms for details. withholding or by making timely estimated taxyear return, see Fiscal Years (FY) in chapter 3 of
payments, you will have an underpayment ofPublication 505.
estimated tax and you may have to pay a pen-Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to your alty.return if box 4 shows federal income tax with- Estimated Tax Generally, you will not have to pay a penaltyheld. Include the amount withheld in the total on
for 2010 if any of the following situations applies.line 61 of Form 1040 or line 38 of Form 1040A. Take credit for all your estimated tax payments
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if you received for 2010 on line 62 of Form 1040 or line 39 of • The total of your withholding and esti-
payments reported on Form 1099-R. Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from mated tax payments was at least as much
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Page 46 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as your 2009 tax (or 110% of your 2009 • You did not have a tax liability for 2009 Fishermen in chapter 4 of Publication 505 for
tax if your AGI was more than $150,000, and your 2009 tax year was 12 months. more information.
$75,000 if your 2010 filing status is mar- • You did not have any withholding taxes IRS can figure the penalty for you. If youried filing separately) and you paid all re- and your current year tax less any house- think you owe the penalty but you do not want toquired estimated tax payments on time. hold employment taxes is less than figure it yourself when you file your tax return,
• The tax balance due on your 2010 return $1,000. you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will
is no more than 10% of your total 2010 figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.See Publication 505, chapter 4, for a definition oftax, and you paid all required estimated However, if you think you are able to lower orªtotal taxº for 2009 and 2010.tax payments on time. eliminate your penalty, you must complete Form
2210 or Form 2210-F and attach it to your return.• Your total 2010 tax minus your withholding Farmers and fishermen Special rules apply if See chapter 4 of Publication 505.and refundable credits is less than $1,000. you are a farmer or fisherman. See Farmers and
Page 44 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 47 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-
ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income or you may be able to take a credit for that year.
5. See Repayments in chapter 12.
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-
ceive travel, transportation, or other businessEmployee expense allowances or reimbursements fromWages, Salaries,
your employer, see Publication 463. If you areCompensation reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-and Other tion 521, Moving Expenses.This section discusses various types of em-
ployee compensation including fringe benefits, Back pay awards. Include in income amountsEarnings retirement plan contributions, stock options, and you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
restricted property. back pay. These include payments made to you
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Form W-2. If you are an employee, you should and unpaid health insurance premiums. Theyreceive Form W-2 from your employer showingReminder should be reported to you by your employer onthe pay you received for your services. Include Form W-2.your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do notresident alien, you must report income from Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsreceive a Form W-2.sources outside the United States (foreign in- you receive for outstanding work are included inIf you performed services, other than as ancome) on your tax return unless it is exempt by your income and should be shown on your Formindependent contractor, and your employer didU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsnot withhold social security and Medicare taxesor outside the United States and whether or not for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youfrom your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol-you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- receive is goods or services, you must includelected Social Security and Medicare Tax onment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This the fair market value of the goods or services inWages, with your Form 1040. These wagesapplies to earned income (such as wages and your income. However, if your employer merelymust be included on line 7 of Form 1040. Seetips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- promises to pay you a bonus or award at someForm 8919 for more information.est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, future time, it is not taxable until you receive it or
and royalties). it is made available to you.Childcare providers. If you provide childcare,
If you reside outside the United States, you either in the child's home or in your home or Employee achievement award. If you re-may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign other place of business, the pay you receive ceive tangible personal property (other thansource earned income. For details, see Publica- must be included in your income. If you are not cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) astion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- an employee, you are probably self-employed an award for length of service or safety achieve-dent Aliens Abroad. and must include payments for your services on ment, you generally can exclude its value fromSchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From your income. However, the amount you can ex-Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net clude is limited to your employer's cost andProfit From Business. You generally are not an cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsemployee unless you are subject to the will and that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchIntroduction control of the person who employs you as to awards you receive during the year. Your em-This chapter discusses compensation received what you are to do and how you are to do it. ployer can tell you whether your award is afor services as an employee, such as wages, qualified plan award. Your employer must makeBabysitting. If you babysit for relatives orsalaries, and fringe benefits. The following top- the award as part of a meaningful presentation,neighborhood children, whether on a regularics are included. under conditions and circumstances that do notbasis or only periodically, the rules for childcare
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-• Bonuses and awards. providers apply to you.
guised pay.• Special rules for certain employees. However, the exclusion does not apply to theMiscellaneous following awards.• Sickness and injury benefits.
Compensation • A length-of-service award if you received itThe chapter explains what income is included for less than 5 years of service or if youThis section discusses different types of em-in the employee's gross income and what is not received another length-of-service awardployee compensation.included. during the year or the previous 4 years.
Advance commissions and other earnings. • A safety achievement award if you are aUseful Items If you receive advance commissions or other manager, administrator, clerical employee,amounts for services to be performed in theYou may want to see: or other professional employee or if morefuture and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you than 10% of eligible employees previouslymust include these amounts in your income inPublication received safety achievement awards dur-the year you receive them.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car ing the year.If you repay unearned commissions or otherExpenses amounts in the same year you receive them,
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care reduce the amount included in your income by Example. Ben Green received three em-
Expenses the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax ployee achievement awards during the year: a
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 45

Page 48 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at Severance pay. You must include in income Fringe Benefits$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo amounts you receive as severance pay and any
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at payment for the cancellation of your employ- Fringe benefits received in connection with the$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali- ment contract. performance of your services are included infied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each your income as compensation unless you payAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-award by itself would be excluded from income. fair market value for them or they are specificallyeral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentHowever, because the $1,750 total value of the excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-for accrued annual leave when you retire orawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include ance of services (for example, under a covenantresign, this amount will be included as wages on$150 ($1,750 ± $1,600) in his income. not to compete) is treated as the performance ofyour Form W-2.
services for purposes of these rules.If you resign from one agency and are reem-Differential wage payments. This is any pay- ployed by another agency, you may have toment made to you by an employer for any period Accounting period. You must use the samerepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-during which you are, for a period of more than accounting period your employer uses to reportment to the second agency. You can reduce30 days, an active duty member of the uni- your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-gross wages by the amount you repaid in theformed services and represents all or a portion ployer has the option to report taxable noncashsame tax year in which you received it. Attach toof the wages you would have received from the fringe benefits by using either of the followingyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statementemployer during that period. These payments rules.given to you by the agency you repaid to explainare treated as wages and are subject to income the difference between the wages on the return • The general rule: benefits are reported fortax withholding, but not FICA or FUTA taxes. and the wages on your Forms W-2. a full calendar year (January 1±DecemberThe payments are reported as wages on Form
31).W-2. Outplacement services. If you choose to
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so • The special accounting period rule: bene-Government cost-of-living allowances. that you can receive outplacement services fits provided during the last 2 months ofCost-of-living allowances generally are included (such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interview the calendar year (or any shorter period)in your income. However, cost-of-living al- techniques), you must include the unreduced are treated as paid during the followinglowances are not included in your income if you amount of the severance pay in income. calendar year. For example, each yearwere a federal civilian employee or a federal However, you can deduct the value of these your employer reports the value of bene-court employee who was stationed in Alaska, outplacement services (up to the difference be- fits provided during the last 2 months ofHawaii, or outside the United States. Beginning tween the severance pay included in income the prior year and the first 10 months ofJanuary 1, 2010, these federal employees are and the amount actually received) as a miscella- the current year.being transitioned from a nontaxable neous deduction (subject to the
cost-of-living adjustment to a taxable local- 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on
Your employer does not have to use the sameity-based comparability payment. Schedule A (Form 1040).
accounting period for each fringe benefit, butAllowances and differentials that increase
must use the same period for all employees whoSick pay. Pay you receive from your employeryour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less
receive a particular benefit.while you are sick or injured is part of your salarydesirable post of duty are part of your compen-
or wages. In addition, you must include in yoursation and must be included in income. For You must use the same accounting periodincome sick pay benefits received from any ofexample, your compensation includes Foreign that you use to report the benefit to claim anthe following payers.Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical employee business deduction (for use of a car,
differentials. For more information, see Publica- for example).• A welfare fund.
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees
• A state sickness or disability fund.Stationed Abroad. Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-
able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other• An association of employers or employ-Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. compensation) of Form W-2. The total value ofees.Your employer will report to you the total amount your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.• An insurance company, if your employerof deferrals for the year under a nonqualified The value of your fringe benefits may be addedpaid for the plan.deferred compensation plan. This amount is to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This you may receive a separate Form W-2 showingHowever, if you paid the premiums on an acci-amount is not included in your income. just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withdent or health insurance policy, the benefits you
However, if at any time during the tax year, a notation in box 14.receive under the policy are not taxable. For
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is more information, see Publication 525.
not operated under those requirements, all
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year Accident or Health PlanSocial security and Medicare taxes paid by
and all preceding tax years are included in your employer. If you and your employer have an
Generally, the value of accident or health planincome for the current year. This amount is in- agreement that your employer pays your social
coverage provided to you by your employer iscluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box security and Medicare taxes without deducting
not included in your income. Benefits you re-1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using them from your gross wages, you must report
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-code Z. the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits.on your tax return. The payment also is treatedNote received for services. If your employer For information on the items covered in thisas wages for figuring your social security andgives you a secured note as payment for your section, other than Long-term care coverage,Medicare taxes and your social security andservices, you must include the fair market value see Publication 969, Health Savings AccountsMedicare benefits. However, these payments(usually the discount value) of the note in your and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.are not treated as social security and Medicareincome for the year you receive it. When you wages if you are a household worker or a farmlater receive payments on the note, a propor- Long-term care coverage. Contributions byworker.tionate part of each payment is the recovery of your employer to provide coverage for long-term
the fair market value that you previously in- care services generally are not included in yourStock appreciation rights. Do not include a
cluded in your income. Do not include that part income. However, contributions made through astock appreciation right granted by your em-
again in your income. Include the rest of the flexible spending or similar arrangement (suchployer in income until you exercise (use) the
payment in your income in the year of payment. as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourright. When you use the right, you are entitled to
income. This amount will be reported as wagesIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiable a cash payment equal to the fair market value of
in box 1 of your Form W-2.unsecured note as payment for your services, the corporation's stock on the date of use minus
payments on the note that are credited toward the fair market value on the date the right was Contributions you make to the plan are dis-
the principal amount of the note are compensa- granted. You include the cash payment in your cussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental
tion income when you receive them. income in the year you use the right. Expenses.
Page 46 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 49 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by requirements for these qualified HSA funding include in income the cost of employer-provided
your employer to your Archer MSA generally are distributions. insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000
not included in your income. Their total will be of coverage reduced by any amount you payFailure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAreported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You toward the purchase of the insurance.received qualified HSA distributions from amust report this amount on Form 8853, Archer For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded ,health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- and Entire cost taxed, later.ified HSA funding distribution, you must be antracts. File the form with your return. If your employer provided more than $50,000eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-
of coverage, the amount included in your in-Health flexible spending arrangement riod beginning with the month in which the quali-
come is reported as part of your wages in box 1(health FSA). If your employer provides a fied distribution was made and ending on the
of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately inhealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or last day of the 12th month following that month.
box 12 with code C.health plan, the amount of your salary reduction, If you fail to be an eligible individual during this
and reimbursements of your medical care ex- period, other than because of death or disability, Group-term life insurance. This insurance ispenses, generally are not included in your in- you must include the distribution in your income term life insurance protection (insurance for acome. for the tax year in which you become ineligible. fixed period of time) that:This income is also subject to an additional 10%Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA tax. • Provides a general death benefit,can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis-
tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee • Is provided to a group of employees,
by your employer. Generally, the distribution is Adoption Assistance • Is provided under a policy carried by thenot included in your income and is not deducti-
employer, andble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for You may be able to exclude from your incomethese qualified HSA distributions. • Provides an amount of insurance to eachamounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
employee based on a formula that pre-ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
vents individual selection.nection with your adoption of an eligible child.If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies
See the Instructions for Form 8839 for moreas an accident or health plan, coverage and
Permanent benefits. If your group-term lifeinformation.reimbursements of your medical care expenses
insurance policy includes permanent benefits,generally are not included in your income.  Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. TheyQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can must include in your income, as wages, the costalso are included as social security and Medi-make a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- of the permanent benefits minus the amount youcare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they aretion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by pay for them. Your employer should be able tonot included as wages in box 1. To determineyour employer. Generally, the distribution is not tell you the amount to include in your income.the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustincluded in your income and is not deductible. complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop- Accidental death benefits. Insurance thatSee Publication 969 for the requirements for tion Expenses. File the form with your return. provides accidental or other death benefits butthese qualified HSA distributions.
does not provide general death benefits (travelHealth savings accounts (HSA). If you are insurance, for example) is not group-term lifean eligible individual, you and any other person, De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits insurance.including your employer or a family member,
If your employer provides you with a product orcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- Former employer. If your former employerservice and the cost of it is so small that it wouldtions, other than employer contributions, are de- provided more than $50,000 of group-term lifebe unreasonable for the employer to account forductible on your return whether or not you insurance coverage during the year, the amountit, the value is not included in your income.itemize deductions. Contributions made by your included in your income is reported as wages inGenerally, the value of benefits such as dis-employer are not included in your income. Distri- box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelycounts at company cafeterias, cab fares homebutions from your HSA that are used to pay in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show thewhen working overtime, and company picnicsqualified medical expenses are not included in amount of uncollected social security and Medi-are not included in your income.your income. Distributions not used for qualified care taxes on the excess coverage, with codesmedical expenses are included in your income. M and N. You must pay these taxes with yourHoliday gifts. If your employer gives you aSee Publication 969 for the requirements of an income tax return. Include them in your total taxturkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atHSA. on line 60, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and theChristmas or other holidays, do not include theContributions by a partnership to a bona fide amount of the taxes on the dotted line next tovalue of the gift in your income. However, if yourpartner's HSA are not contributions by an em- line 60.employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or aployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
similar item that you can easily exchange forbution of money and are not included in the Two or more employers. Your exclusion forcash, you include the value of that gift as extrapartner's gross income. Contributions by a part- employer-provided group-term life insurancesalary or wages regardless of the amount in-nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 ofvolved.are treated as guaranteed payments that are coverage, whether the insurance is provided byincludible in the partner's gross income. In both a single employer or multiple employers. If twosituations, the partner can deduct the contribu- or more employers provide insurance coverageEducational Assistancetion made to the partner's HSA. that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not beYou can exclude from your income up to $5,250shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren- correct. You must figure how much to include inof qualified employer-provided educational as-dered are treated as guaranteed payments and your income. Reduce the amount you figure bysistance. For more information, see Publicationare includible in the shareholder-employee's any amount reported with code C in box 12 of970, Tax Benefits for Education.gross income. The shareholder-employee can your Forms W-2, add the result to the wagesdeduct the contribution made to the share- reported in box 1, and report the total on yourholder-employee's HSA. return.Group-Term Life Insurance
Qualified HSA funding distribution. You
Figuring the taxable cost. Use the followingGenerally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofcan make a one-time distribution from your indi-
worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourgroup-term life insurance coverage provided tovidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and
income.you by your employer (or former employer) is notyou generally will not include any of the distribu-
included in your income. However, you musttion in your income. See Publication 590 for the
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

Page 50 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not included in your income. Qualified servicesWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the
Example. You are 51 years old and work for include retirement planning advice, informationCost of Group-Term Life employers A and B. Both employers provide about your employer's retirement plan, and in-Insurance To Include in group-term life insurance coverage for you for formation about how the plan may fit into yourIncome the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with overall individual retirement income plan. YouKeep for Your Records
 employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to vided by your employer.1. Enter the total amount of your
include in your income as shown in Worksheetinsurance coverage from your
5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group-Term Life Insur-employer(s) .......... . 1.
ance to Include in IncomeÐIllustrated , earlier. Transportation2. Limit on exclusion for
employer-provided
If your employer provides you with a qualifiedgroup-term life insurance Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedcoverage ............ . 2. 50,000 Group-Term Life Insurance for One from your income, up to certain limits. A qualified3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. Month transportation fringe benefit is:4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
Figure to the nearest tenth 4. Age Cost • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your Under 25 ................. . $ .05 hicle (such as a van) between your homeage on the last day of the tax 25 through 29 .............. . .06 and work place,year, find your age group in 30 through 34 .............. . .08the left column, and enter the • A transit pass,35 through 39 .............. . .09cost from the column on the 40 through 44 .............. . .10 • Qualified parking, orright for your age group .. . 5. 45 through 49 .............. . .15
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. • Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse-50 through 54 .............. . .23
7. Enter the number of full ment.55 through 59 .............. . .43
months of coverage at this 60 through 64 .............. . .66 Cash reimbursement by your employer for thesecost. ............... . 7. 65 through 69 .............. . 1.27 expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 70 and older ............... . 2.06 rangement also is excludable. However, cash9. Enter the premiums reimbursement for a transit pass is excludableyou paid per month 9. Entire cost excluded. You are not taxed on only if a voucher or similar item that can be10. Enter the number of the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the exchanged only for a transit pass is not readilymonths you paid following circumstances apply. available for direct distribution to you.the premiums ... . 10.
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 1. You are permanently and totally disabled Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. and have ended your employment. vehicle transportation and transit pass fringeInclude this amount in your
benefits cannot be more than $230 a month.2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-income as wages ...... . 12.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringeicy for the entire period the insurance is in
benefit cannot be more than $230 a month.force during the tax year.Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut-3. A charitable organization (defined in chap-Cost of Group-Term Life ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by theter 24) to which contributions are deducti-Insurance to Include in number of qualified bicycle commuting monthsble is the only beneficiary of the policy for that year.IncomeÐIllustrated the entire period the insurance is in force If the benefits have a value that is more thanKeep for Your Records
 during the tax year. (You are not entitled to these limits, the excess must be included in youra deduction for a charitable contribution for income. You are not entitled to these exclusions1. Enter the total amount of your naming a charitable organization as the if the reimbursements are made under a com-insurance coverage from your beneficiary of your policy.) pensation reduction agreement.employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and2. Limit on exclusion for Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-
employer-provided way vehicle that seats at least six adults (nota. You retired before January 2, 1984, andgroup-term life insurance including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi-were covered by the plan when you re-coverage ............ . 2. 50,000 cle's mileage must reasonably be expected totired, or3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000 be:
b. You reached age 55 before January 2,4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. • For transporting employees between theirFigure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0 1984, and were employed by the em-
homes and work place, andployer or its predecessor in 1983.5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your
age on the last day of the tax • On trips during which employees occupy
year, find your age group in at least half of the vehicle's adult seatingEntire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entirethe left column, and enter the capacity (not including the driver).cost from the column on the cost of group-term life insurance if either of the
right for your age group .. . 5. .23 following circumstances apply.
Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90 • The insurance is provided by your em- card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person7. Enter the number of full ployer through a qualified employees' to ride mass transit (whether public or private)months of coverage at this trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commutercost. ............... . 7. 12 annuity plan. highway vehicle operated by a person in the8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80
business of transporting persons for compensa-9. Enter the premiums • You are a key employee and your em-
tion.you paid per month 9. 4.15 ployer's plan discriminates in favor of key
10. Enter the number of employees. Qualified parking. This is parking provided tomonths you paid an employee at or near the employer's place ofthe premiums ... . 10. 12 business. It also includes parking provided on orRetirement Planning Services11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80 near a location from which the employee com-12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. If your employer has a qualified retirement plan, mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuterInclude this amount in your qualified retirement planning services provided highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-income as wages ...... . 12. 33.00 to you (and your spouse) by your employer are clude parking at or near the employee's home.
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 51 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified bicycle commuting. This is reim- Qualified automatic contribution arrange- your income in the year you receive the prop-
erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-bursement based on the number of qualified
erty that has certain restrictions that affect itstion arrangement, your employer can treat youbicycle commuting months for the year. A quali-
value, you do not include the value of the prop-as having elected to have a part of your compen-fied bicycle commuting month is any month you
erty in your income until it has substantiallysation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. Youuse the bicycle regularly for a substantial portion
vested. (You can choose to include the value ofare to receive written notice of your rights andof the travel between your home and place of
the property in your income in the year it isobligations under the qualified automatic contri-employment and you do not receive any of the
transferred to you.) For more information, seebution arrangement. The notice must explainother qualified transportation fringe benefits. Restricted Property in Publication 525. The reimbursement can be for expenses you • Your rights to elect not to have elective
incurred during the year for the purchase of a contributions made, or to have contribu- Dividends received on restricted stock.
bicycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and tions made at a different percentage, and Dividends you receive on restricted stock are
storage. treated as compensation and not as dividend• How contributions made will be invested in income. Your employer should include thesethe absence of any investment decision by payments on your Form W-2.Retirement Plan you.
Stock you chose to include in income.Contributions You must be given a reasonable period of Dividends you receive on restricted stock you
time after receipt of the notice and before the chose to include in your income in the yearYour employer's contributions to a qualified re- first elective contribution is made to make an transferred are treated the same as any othertirement plan for you are not included in income dividends. Report them on your return as divi-election with respect to the contributions.at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) Overall limit on deferrals. For 2010, you ter 8.generally should not have deferred more than aHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage   For information on how to treat dividendstotal of $16,500 of contributions to the plansincluded in the plan may have to be included. reported on both your Form W-2 and Formlisted in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limitSee Group-Term Life Insurance , earlier, under 1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedfor SIMPLE plans is $11,500. The limit for sec-Fringe Benefits. stock in Publication 525.tion 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000If your employer pays into a nonqualified
or 25% of your compensation. The limit for sec-plan for you, you generally must include the tion 457 plans is the lesser of your includiblecontributions in your income as wages for the compensation or $16,500.tax year in which the contributions are made. Special Rules for
However, if your interest in the plan is not trans- Designated Roth contributions. Employ-
ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plansferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- Certain Employees
can create qualified Roth contribution programsture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the
so that you may elect to have part or all of yourtime of the contribution, you do not have to This section deals with special rules for people
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-include the value of your interest in your income in certain types of employment: members of the
ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Rothuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a clergy, members of religious orders, people
contributions are treated as elective deferrals, working for foreign employers, military person-substantial risk of forfeiture.
except that they are included in income. nel, and volunteers.For information on distributions from
Excess deferrals. Your employer or planretirement plans, see Publication 575,
administrator should apply the proper annual ClergyPension and Annuity Income (or Publi-
TIP
limit when figuring your plan contributions. How-cation 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Re-
ever, you are responsible for monitoring the total If you are a member of the clergy, you musttirement Benefits, if you are a federal employee
you defer to ensure that the deferrals are not include in your income offerings and fees youor retiree). more than the overall limit. receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If theIf you set aside more than the limit, the ex-Elective deferrals. If you are covered by cer- offering is made to the religious institution, it iscess generally must be included in your incometain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to not taxable to you.for that year, unless you have an excess deferral
have part of your compensation contributed by    If you are a member of a religious organiza-of a designated Roth contribution. See Publica-
your employer to a retirement fund, rather than tion and you give your outside earnings to thetion 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of
have it paid to you. The amount you set aside organization, you still must include the earningsexcess deferrals.
(called an elective deferral) is treated as an in your income. However, you may be entitled toCatch-up contributions. You may be al-employer contribution to a qualified plan. An a charitable contribution deduction for thelowed catch-up contributions (additional electiveelective deferral, other than a designated Roth amount paid to the organization. See chapterdeferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end of 24.contribution (discussed later), is not included in your tax year.wages subject to income tax at the time contrib- Pension. A pension or retirement pay for auted. However, it is included in wages subject to member of the clergy usually is treated as anyStock Optionssocial security and Medicare taxes. other pension or annuity. It must be reported on
Elective deferrals include elective contribu- lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or selltions to the following retirement plans. and 12b of Form 1040A.stock or other property as payment for your
services, you usually will have income when you1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section Housing.  Special rules for housing apply toreceive the option, when you exercise the option401(k) plans). members of the clergy. Under these rules, you(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property), do not include in your income the rental value of2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the a home (including utilities) or a designated hous-ees. option. However, if your option is a statutory ing allowance provided to you as part of yourstock option, you will not have any income until3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- pay. However, the exclusion cannot be moreyou sell or exchange your stock. Your employersion plans (SARSEP). than the reasonable pay for your service. If youcan tell you which kind of option you hold. For pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- more information, see Publication 525. ance designated for utility cost, up to your actualees (SIMPLE plans). cost. The home or allowance must be provided
5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). as compensation for your services as an or-Restricted Property
dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. Generally, if you receive property for your serv- However, you must include the rental value of
7. Section 457 plans. ices, you must include its fair market value in the home or the housing allowance as earnings
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

Page 52 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from self-employment on Schedule SE (Form Military retirement pay. If your retirementForeign Employer1040) if you are subject to the self-employment pay is based on age or length of service, it is
tax. For more information, see Publication 517, taxable and must be included in your income asSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignSocial Security and Other Information for Mem- a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 oremployer.bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers. on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
include in your income the amount of any reduc-U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aworks in the United States for a foreign govern-Members of Religious survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenment, an international organization, a foreignOrders under the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec-embassy, or any foreign employer, you must tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.include your salary in your income.If you are a member of a religious order who has For more detailed discussion of survivor an-
taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings Social security and Medicare taxes. You nuities, see chapter 10.
that you renounce and turn over to the order are exempt from social security and Medicare Disability. If you are retired on disability,depends on whether your services are per- employee taxes if you are employed in the see Military and Government Disability Pen-formed for the order. United States by an international organization or sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.a foreign government. However, you must pay
Services performed for the order. If you are self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-performing the services as an agent of the order ices performed in the United States, even come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,in the exercise of duties required by the order, though you are not self-employed. This rule also regulation, or administrative practice adminis-do not include in your income the amounts applies if you are an employee of a qualifying tered by the Department of Veterans Affairsturned over to the order. wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orIf your order directs you to perform services ernment. their families are not taxable.for another agency of the supervising church or
• Education, training, and subsistence al-an associated institution, you are considered to Employees of international organizations or lowances.be performing the services as an agent of the foreign governments. Your compensationorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an for official services to an international organiza- • Disability compensation and pension pay-order that you turn over to the order are not tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are ments for disabilities paid either to veter-included in your income. not a citizen of the United States or you are a ans or their families.
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are • Grants for homes designed for wheelchairExample. You are a member of a church a citizen of the United States). living.order and have taken a vow of poverty. You Your compensation for official services to arenounce any claims to your earnings and turn foreign government is exempt from federal in- • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoover to the order any salaries or wages you come tax if all of the following are true. lost their sight or the use of their limbs.earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order
• You are not a citizen of the United States • Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-assigns you to work in a hospital that is an
or you are a citizen of the Philippines dends paid either to veterans or their ben-associated institution of the church. However,
(whether or not you are a citizen of the eficiaries, including the proceeds of ayou remain under the general direction and con-
United States). veteran's endowment policy paid beforetrol of the order. You are considered to be an
death.agent of the order and any wages you earn at • Your work is like the work done by em-the hospital that you turn over to your order are ployees of the United States in foreign • Interest on insurance dividends you leavenot included in your income. countries. on deposit with the VA.
• The foreign government gives an equalServices performed outside the order. If • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
exemption to employees of the Unitedyou are directed to work outside the order, your tance program.
States in its country.services are not an exercise of duties required • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of aby the order unless they meet both of the follow- member of the Armed Forces who diedWaiver of alien status. If you are an aliening requirements. after September 10, 2001.who works for a foreign government or interna-• They are the kind of services that are ordi- tional organization and you file a waiver under • Payments made under the compensatednarily the duties of members of the order. section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- work therapy program.
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different• They are part of the duties that you must • Any bonus payment by a state or politicalrules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious subdivision because of service in a com-cation 525.order as its agent. bat zone.
If you are an employee of a third party, the Employment abroad. For information on theservices you perform for the third party will not tax treatment of income earned abroad, seebe considered directed or required of you by the VolunteersPublication 54.order. Amounts you receive for these services
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aare included in your income, even if you have
volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similartaken a vow of poverty. Military
agency is covered in the following discussions.
 Payments you receive as a member of a militaryExample. Mark Brown is a member of a Peace Corps. Living allowances you receiveservice generally are taxed as wages except forreligious order and has taken a vow of poverty. as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.He renounces all claims to his earnings and for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,Allowances generally are not taxed. For moreturns over his earnings to the order. and clothing are exempt from tax.information on the tax treatment of military al-Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed
lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,by the superiors of the order to get a job with a Taxable allowances. The following al-
Armed Forces' Tax Guide.private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- lowances must be included in your income and
ployee of the school, and, at his request, the reported as wages.
school made the salary payments directly to the Differential wage payments. Any payments • Allowances paid to your spouse and minororder. made to you by an employer during the time you children while you are a volunteer leaderBecause Mark is an employee of the school, are performing service in the uniformed services training in the United States.he is performing services for the school rather are treated as compensation. These wages are
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark subject to income tax withholding and are re- • Living allowances designated by the Di-
earns working for the school are included in his ported on a Form W-2. See the discussion under rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-
income. Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier. pensation. These are allowances for
Page 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 53 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
personal items such as domestic help, For information on disability payments from a
governmental program provided as a substitutelaundry and clothing maintenance, enter- Sickness and Injury for unemployment compensation, see chaptertainment and recreation, transportation,
12.and other miscellaneous expenses. Benefits
• Leave allowances. Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you
This section discusses sickness and injury ben- receive payments from a retirement or• Readjustment allowances or termination efits including disability pensions, long-term profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-payments. These are considered received care insurance contracts, workers' compensa- bility retirement, do not treat the payments as aby you when credited to your account. tion, and other benefits. disability pension. The payments must be re-
ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-Generally, you must report as income any
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps mation on pensions, see chapter 10.amount you receive for personal injury or sick-
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment ness through an accident or health plan that is Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-allowance during his period of service, to be paid paid for by your employer. If both you and your bility, any lump-sum payment you receive forto him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of employer pay for the plan, only the amount you accrued annual leave is a salary payment. Theduty. Although the allowance is not available to receive that is due to your employer's payments payment is not a disability payment. Include it inhim until the end of his service, Gary must in- is reported as income. However, certain pay- your income in the tax year you receive it.clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is ments may not be taxable to you. Your employer
credited to his account. should be able to give you specific details about
your pension plan and tell you the amount you Military and Governmentpaid for your disability pension. In addition toVolunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If Disability Pensionsdisability pensions and annuities, you may beyou are a VISTA volunteer, you must include receiving other payments for sickness and in-meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your Certain military and government disability pen-jury.income as wages. sions are not taxable.
Do not report as income any amounts Service-connected disability. You may bepaid to reimburse you for medical ex-National Senior Services Corps programs. able to exclude from income amounts you re-penses you incurred after the plan was
TIPDo not include in your income amounts you ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceestablished.receive for supportive services or reimburse- for personal injury or sickness resulting from
ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol- active service in one of the following govern-
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost oflowing programs. ment services.
a health or accident insurance plan, do not in-• Retired Senior Volunteer Program • The armed forces of any country.clude any amounts you receive from the plan for(RSVP). personal injury or sickness as income on your • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi-• Foster Grandparent Program. Administration.
cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year,• Senior Companion Program. • The Public Health Service.you may have to include some, or all, of the
reimbursement in your income. See Reimburse- • The Foreign Service.
ment in a later year in chapter 21.Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- Conditions for exclusion. Do not include
ive services or reimbursements for Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered the disability payments in your income if any of
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not by an accident or health insurance plan through the following conditions apply.
include these amounts in income. a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-
1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityance premiums was not included in your in-
payment before September 25, 1975.come, you are not considered to have paid theVolunteer tax counseling. Do not include in premiums and you must include any benefits 2. You were a member of a listed govern-your income any reimbursements you receive you receive in your income. If the amount of the ment service or its reserve component, orfor transportation, meals, and other expenses premiums was included in your income, you are were under a binding written commitmentyou have in training for, or actually providing, considered to have paid the premiums, and any to become a member, on September 24,volunteer federal income tax counseling for the benefits you receive are not taxable. 1975.elderly (TCE).
3. You receive the disability payments for aYou can deduct as a charitable contribution Disability Pensions combat-related injury. This is a personalyour unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in
injury or sickness thattaking part in the volunteer income tax assis- If you retired on disability, you must include intance (VITA) program. See chapter 24. income any disability pension you receive under a. Results directly from armed conflict,
a plan that is paid for by your employer. You b. Takes place while you are engaged inmust report your taxable disability payments asVolunteer firefighters and emergency medi- extra-hazardous service,wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,cal responders. If you are a volunteer
until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-firefighter or emergency medical responder, do c. Takes place under conditions simulat-
mum retirement age generally is the age at ing war, including training exercisesnot include in your income the following benefits
which you can first receive a pension or annuity such as maneuvers, oryou receive from a state or local government.
if you are not disabled. d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.• Rebates or reductions of property or in-
You may be entitled to a tax credit ifcome taxes you receive because of serv-
you were permanently and totally dis- 4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityices you performed as a volunteer
abled when you retired. For informa- compensation from the Department of Vet-firefighter or emergency medical re-
TIP
tion on this credit and the definition of permanent erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-sponder.
and total disability, see chapter 33. tion for it. Your exclusion under this• Payments you receive because of serv- condition is equal to the amount you wouldBeginning on the day after you reach mini-ices you performed as a volunteer be entitled to receive from the VA.mum retirement age, payments you receive arefirefighter or emergency medical re- taxable as a pension or annuity. Report thesponder, up to $30 for each month you payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or Pension based on years of service. If youprovided services. on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules receive a disability pension based on years of
The excluded income reduces any related tax or for reporting pensions are explained in How To service, you generally must include it in your
contribution deduction. Report in chapter 10. income. However, if the pension qualifies for the
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 51

Page 54 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- for qualified long-term care services. The con- If part of your workers' compensation
cussed earlier), do not include in income the part reduces your social security ortract must:
of your pension that you would have received if equivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
!• Be guaranteed renewable,the pension had been based on a percentage of received, that part is considered social security
disability. You must include the rest of your pen- (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and• Not provide for a cash surrender value or
sion in your income. may be taxable. For more information, see Pub-other money that can be paid, assigned,
lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-pledged, or borrowed,Retroactive VA determination. If you retire road Retirement Benefits.from the armed services based on years of serv- • Provide that refunds, other than refunds
ice and are later given a retroactive serv- on the death of the insured or complete Return to work.   If you return to work afterice-connected disability rating by the VA, your surrender or cancellation of the contract, qualifying for workers' compensation, salaryretirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- and dividends under the contract may be payments you receive for performing light dutiescluded from income up to the amount of VA used only to reduce future premiums or are taxable as wages.disability benefits you would have been entitled increase future benefits, andto receive. You can claim a refund of any tax
• Generally not pay or reimburse expensespaid on the excludable amount (subject to the Other Sickness and Injury
incurred for services or items that wouldstatute of limitations) by filing an amended re-
Benefitsturn on Form 1040X for each previous year be reimbursed under Medicare, except
during the retroactive period. where Medicare is a secondary payer or In addition to disability pensions and annuities,the contract makes per diem or other peri-If you receive a lump-sum disability sever- you may receive other payments for sickness orance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- odic payments without regard to ex- injury.ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance penses.
benefit from your income. However, you must Railroad sick pay.    Payments you receive asinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust- sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-Qualified long-term care services. Qualifiedment or other nondisability severance payment surance Act are taxable and you must includelong-term care services are:you received on release from active duty, even if them in your income. However, do not includeyou are later given a retroactive disability rating • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobby the VA. peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re- injury.
habilitative services, and maintenance and If you received income because of a disabil-Special statute of limitations. Generally,
personal care services, andunder the statute of limitations a claim for credit ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.
or refund must be filed within 3 years from the • Required by a chronically ill individual and Federal Employees' Compensation Acttime a return was filed. However, if you receive a provided pursuant to a plan of care as (FECA). Payments received under this Act forretroactive service-connected disability rating prescribed by a licensed health care prac- personal injury or sickness, including paymentsdetermination, the statute of limitations is ex- titioner. to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.tended by a 1-year period beginning on the date
However, you are taxed on amounts you receiveof the determination. This 1-year extended pe-
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45riod applies to claims for credit or refund filed
dividual is one who has been certified by a days while a claim is being decided. Report thisafter June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any
income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A ortax year that began more than 5 years before the licensed health care practitioner within the previ-
date of the determination. on line 1 of Form 1040-EZ. Also, pay for sickous 12 months as one of the following.
leave while a claim is being processed is taxable• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isExample. You retired in 2004 and receive a and must be included in your income as wages.unable to perform at least two activities ofpension based on your years of service. On If part of the payments you receivedaily living without substantial assistanceAugust 6, 2010, you receive a determination of under FECA reduces your social se-due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-service-connected disability retroactive to 2004. curity or equivalent railroad retirementties of daily living are eating, toileting,
CAUTION
!Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxes benefits received, that part is considered socialtransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-paid on your pension for 2007, 2008, and 2009. security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-nence.However, under the special limitation period, fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theyou can also file a claim for 2006 as long as you • An individual who requires substantial su- taxability of these benefits, see Social securityfile the claim by August 8, 2011. You cannot file pervision to be protected from threats to and equivalent railroad retirement benefitsa claim for 2004 and 2005 because those tax health and safety due to severe cognitive under Other Income, in Publication 525.years began more than 5 years before the deter- impairment.   You can deduct the amount you spend tomination.
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be
eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatTerrorist attack or military action. Do not Limit on exclusion. You generally can ex-
period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toinclude in your income disability payments you clude from gross income up to $290 a day for
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- 2010. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term
If you buy back sick leave in the same year yourorist or military action. Care Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and
used it, the amount reduces your taxable sickInjury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor-
leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.mation.Long-Term Care
Other compensation. Many other amountsInsurance Contracts Workers' Compensation you receive as compensation for sickness or
Long-term care insurance contracts generally injury are not taxable. These include the follow-Amounts you receive as workers' compensationare treated as accident and health insurance ing amounts.
for an occupational sickness or injury are fullycontracts. Amounts you receive from them • Compensatory damages you receive forexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers'(other than policyholder dividends or premium physical injury or physical sickness,compensation act or a statute in the nature of arefunds) generally are excludable from income whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicworkers' compensation act. The exemption alsoas amounts received for personal injury or sick- payments.applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made
on a per diem or other periodic basis under a ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits • Benefits you receive under an accident or
long-term care insurance contract, you must file you receive based on your age, length of serv- health insurance policy on which either
Form 8853 with your return. ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you you paid the premiums or your employer
retired because of an occupational sickness or paid the premiums but you had to includeA long-term care insurance contract is an
insurance contract that only provides coverage injury. them in your income.
Page 52 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 55 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Disability benefits you receive for loss of ❏ 4070 Employee's Report of Tips to Electronic tip record. You can use an elec-
income or earning capacity as a result of tronic system provided by your employer to re-Employer
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- cord your daily tips. If you do, you must receive
icy. and keep a paper copy of this record.
• Compensation you receive for permanent Mandatory service charges. Do not write inloss or loss of use of a part or function of your tip diary the amount of any mandatory serv-Keeping a Daily Tipyour body, or for your permanent disfig- ice charge that your employer adds to a cus-urement. This compensation must be tomer's bill and then pays to you and treats asRecordbased only on the injury and not on the wages. This is part of your wages, not a tip. Seeperiod of your absence from work. These examples below.benefits are not taxable even if your em- Why keep a daily tip record. You must keepployer pays for the accident and health Example 1. Good Food Restaurant adds ana daily tip record so you can:plan that provides these benefits. 18% charge to the bill for parties of 6 or more• Report your tips accurately to your em- customers. Jane's bill for food and beveragesployer, for her party of 8 includes an amount on the tipReimbursement for medical care. A reim-
line equal to 18% of the charges for food andbursement for medical care is generally not tax- • Report your tips accurately on your tax
beverages, and the total includes this amount.able. However, it may reduce your medical return, and
Since Jane did not have an unrestricted right toexpense deduction. For more information, see • Prove your tip income if your return is ever determine the amount of the tip, the 18% chargechapter 21.
questioned. is considered a mandatory service charge. Do
not include the 18% charge in your tip diary.
Mandatory service charges that are paid to youHow to keep a daily tip record. There are two are considered wages, not tips.ways to keep a daily tip record. You can either:
• Write information about your tips in a tip Example 2. Good Food Restaurant also in-
cludes sample calculations of tip amounts at thediary, or6.
bottom of its bills for food and beverages pro-• Keep copies of documents that show your vided to customers. David's bill includes a blanktips, such as restaurant bills and credit or ªtip line,º with sample tip calculations of 15%,
debit card charge slips. 18%, and 20% of his charges for food and bev-Tip Income
erages at the bottom of the bill beneath theYou should keep your daily tip record with your
signature line. Since David was free to enter anytax or other personal records. You must keep
amount on the ªtip lineº or leave it blank, anyyour records for as long as they are important forIntroduction amount he includes is considered a tip. Be sureadministration of the federal tax law. For infor- to include this amount in your tip diary.This chapter is for employees who receive tips. mation on how long to keep records, see Publi-
All tips you receive are income and are sub- cation 552, Recordkeeping for Individuals.
ject to federal income tax. You must include in   If you keep a tip diary, you can use Formgross income all tips you receive directly,
4070A, Employee's Daily Record of Tips. To get Reporting Tips to Yourcharged tips paid to you by your employer, and
Form 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Serviceyour share of any tips you receive under a
(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244. Employertip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement.
Publication 1244 includes a 1-year supply ofThe value of noncash tips, such as tickets,
Form 4070A. Each day, write in the informationpasses, or other items of value, are also income Why report tips to your employer. You must
and subject to tax. asked for on the form. report tips to your employer so that:
Reporting your tip income correctly is not In addition to the information asked for on • Your employer can withhold federal in-difficult. You must do three things. Form 4070A, you also need to keep a record of come tax and social security and Medicare
the date and value of any noncash tips you get, taxes or railroad retirement tax,1. Keep a daily tip record.
such as tickets, passes, or other items of value. • Your employer can report the correct2. Report tips to your employer. Although you do not report these tips to your amount of your earnings to the Social Se-employer, you must report them on your tax3. Report all your tips on your income tax curity Administration or Railroad Retire-
return.return. ment Board (which affects your benefits
when you retire or if you become disabled,If you do not use Form 4070A, start your
or your family's benefits if you die), andrecords by writing your name, your employer'sThis chapter will explain these three things and
name, and the name of the business (if it isshow you what to do on your tax return if you • You can avoid the penalty for not reporting
have not done the first two. This chapter will also different from your employer's name). Then, tips to your employer (explained later).
show you how to treat allocated tips. each workday, write the date and the following
For information on special tip programs and information. What tips to report. Report to your employeragreements, see Publication 531. • Cash tips you get directly from customers only cash, check, and debit and credit card tips
you receive.or from other employees.Useful Items If your total tips for any 1 month from any one• Tips from credit and debit card chargeYou may want to see: job are less than $20, do not report the tips forcustomers that your employer pays you. that month to that employer.Publication If you participate in a tip-splitting or• The value of any noncash tips you get,
tip-pooling arrangement, report only the tips you❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income such as tickets, passes, or other items of
receive and retain. Do not report to your em-value.❏ 1244 Employee's Daily Record of Tips ployer any portion of the tips you receive thatand Report to Employer • The amount of tips you paid out to other you pass on to other employees. However, you
employees through tip pools or tip split- must report tips you receive from other employ-Form (and Instructions) ting, or other arrangements, and the ees.
names of the employees to whom you Do not report the value of any noncash tips,❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Tax
such as tickets or passes, to your employer. Youon Unreported Tip Income paid the tips.
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 53

Page 56 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
until the close of the calendar year to pay the Ben's Form W-2 from Blue Ocean Restau-do not pay social security and Medicare taxes or
rest of the taxes. rant shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plusrailroad retirement tax on these tips.
If you do not give your employer enough $7,000 reported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18
How to report.   If your employer does not money, your employer will apply your regular unreported tips to that amount and reports
give you any other way to report tips, you can pay and any money you give to the taxes in the $17,018 as wages on his tax return.
use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for following order.
Reporting social security and Medicareon the form, sign and date the form, and give it to
1. All taxes on your regular pay. taxes on tips not reported to your employer.your employer. To get a 1-year supply of the If you received $20 or more in cash and chargeform, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica- 2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail- tips in a month from any one job and did nottion 1244. road retirement tax on your reported tips. report all of those tips to your employer, youIf you do not use Form 4070, give your em- 3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on must report the social security and Medicareployer a statement with the following informa- your reported tips. taxes on the unreported tips as additional tax ontion. your return. To report these taxes, you must fileAny taxes that remain unpaid can be col- a return even if you would not otherwise have to• Your name, address, and social security lected by your employer from your next file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot filenumber. paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol- Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)lected at the end of the year, you may be subject• Your employer's name, address, and busi- Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enterto a penalty for underpayment of estimatedness name (if it is different from your em- the tax on your return as instructed, and attachtaxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholdingployer's name). the completed Form 4137 to your return.and Estimated Tax, for more information.
• The month (or the dates of any shorter If you are subject to the Railroad Re-Uncollected taxes.  You must report tirement Tax Act, you cannot use Formperiod) in which you received tips. on your tax return any social security 4137 to pay railroad retirement tax on
CAUTION
!and Medicare taxes or railroad retire-• The total tips required to be reported for
CAUTION
! unreported tips. To get railroad retirement credit,ment tax that remained uncollected at the end ofthat period. you must report tips to your employer.2010. These uncollected taxes will be shown on
You must sign and date the statement. Be sure your 2010 Form W-2. See Reporting uncollected Reporting uncollected social security andto keep a copy with your tax or other personal social security and Medicare taxes on tips re- Medicare taxes on tips reported to your em-records. ported to your employer  under Reporting Tips ployer. You may have uncollected taxes ifon Your Tax Return, later.Your employer may require you to report your your regular pay was not enough for your em-
ployer to withhold all the taxes you owe and youtips more than once a month. However, the
did not give your employer enough money to paystatement cannot cover a period of more than 1
the rest of the taxes. For more information, seecalendar month.
Giving your employer money for taxes , underReporting Tips on YourElectronic tip statement. Your employer Reporting Tips to Your Employer, earlier.
can have you furnish your tip statements elec- If your employer could not collect all theTax Return
tronically. social security and Medicare taxes or railroad
retirement tax you owe on tips reported for 2010,When to report. Give your report for each How to report tips.   Report your tips with the uncollected taxes will be shown in box 12 ofmonth to your employer by the 10th of the next your wages on Form 1040, line 7; Form 1040A, your Form W-2 (codes A and B). You mustline 7; or Form 1040EZ, line 1.month. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, report these amounts as additional tax on youror legal holiday, give your employer the report by return.What tips to report. You must report all tipsthe next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or To report these uncollected taxes, you mustyou received in 2010 on your tax return, includ-legal holiday. file a return even if you would not otherwise haveing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips you
to file. Include the taxes in your total tax amountreported to your employer for 2010 are included
Example 1. You must report your tips re- on Form 1040, line 60, and write ªUTº and thein the wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.
ceived in September 2011 by October 11, 2011. total of the uncollected taxes on the dotted lineAdd to the amount in box 1 only the tips you did
October 10 is a legal holiday, and the 11th is the next to line 60. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ ornot report to your employer.
Form 1040A.)next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal If you received $20 or more in cash andholiday. charge tips in a month and did not
report all of those tips to your em-
CAUTION
!Example 2. You must report your tips re- ployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-ceived in October 2011 by November 10, 2011. Allocated Tipscare taxes on tips not reported to your employer,
later.Final report. If your employment ends dur- If your employer allocated tips to you, they areing the month, you can report your tips when If you did not keep a daily tip record as shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.your employment ends. required and an amount is shown in They are not included in box 1 with your wages
box 8 of your Form W-2, see Allocated and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-
CAUTION
!Penalty for not reporting tips. If you do not Tips, later. sion does not apply to you.report tips to your employer as required, you
If you kept a daily tip record and reported tipsmay be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the What are allocated tips. These are tips thatto your employer as required under the rulessocial security and Medicare taxes or railroad your employer assigned to you in addition to theexplained earlier, add the following tips to theretirement tax you owe on the unreported tips. tips you reported to your employer for the year.amount in box 1 of your Form W-2.(For information about these taxes, see Report- Your employer will have done this only if:
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips • Cash and charge tips you received that • You worked in an establishment (restau-not reported to your employer  under Reporting totaled less than $20 for any month. rant, cocktail lounge, or similar business)Tips on Your Tax Return , later.) The penalty • The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, that must allocate tips to employees,amount is in addition to the taxes you owe. passes, or other items of value. • The tips you reported to your employerYou can avoid this penalty if you can show
were less than your share of 8% of foodreasonable cause for not reporting the tips to
Example. Ben Smith began working at the and drink sales, andyour employer. To do so, attach a statement to Blue Ocean Restaurant (his only employer inyour return explaining why you did not report • You did not participate in your employer's2010) on June 30 and received $10,000 inthem. Attributed Tip Income Program (ATIP).wages during the year. John kept a daily tip
Giving your employer money for taxes. record showing that his tips for June were $18 No income, social security, or Medicare taxes
Your regular pay may not be enough for your and his tips for the rest of the year totaled are withheld on allocated tips.
employer to withhold all the taxes you owe on $7,000. He was not required to report his June
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If this tips to his employer, but he reported all of the How were your allocated tips figured. The
happens, you can give your employer money rest of his tips to his employer as required. tips allocated to you are your share of an amount
Page 54 Chapter 6 Tip Income

Page 57 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
figured by subtracting the reported tips of all • When to report interest income. Social security number (SSN). You must
employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate) give your name and SSN to any person required• How to report interest income on your taxof food and drink sales (other than carryout by federal tax law to make a return, statement,return.sales and sales with a service charge of 10% or or other document that relates to you. This in-
more). Your share of that amount was figured cludes payers of interest.In general, any interest you receive or that isusing either a method provided by an em-
credited to your account and can be withdrawn SSN for joint account. If the funds in a jointployer-employee agreement or a method pro-
is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule are account belong to one person, list that person'svided by IRS regulations based on employees'
discussed later in this chapter. name first on the account and give that person'ssales or hours worked. For information about the
exact allocation method used, ask your em- You may be able to deduct expenses you SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns
ployer. have in earning this income on Schedule A the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See later.) If the joint account contains combined
Must you report your allocated tips on your chapter 28. funds, give the SSN of the person whose name
return. You must report allocated tips on your is listed first on the account. This is because onlytax return unless either of the following excep- one name and SSN can be shown on FormUseful Itemstions applies. 1099.You may want to see:
These rules apply both to joint ownership by• You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-
dence that is as credible and reliable as a a married couple and to joint ownership by otherPublicationdaily tip record, as required under rules individuals. For example, if you open a joint
❏ 537 Installment Salesexplained earlier. savings account with your child using funds be-
longing to the child, list the child's name first on• Your tip record is incomplete, but it shows ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
the account and give the child's SSN.that your actual tips were more than the ❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discounttips you reported to your employer plus Custodian account for your child. If your(OID) Instrumentsthe allocated tips. child is the actual owner of an account that is
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,If either exception applies, report your actual tips Form (and Instructions)
on your return. Do not report the allocated tips. give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) See What tips to report under Reporting Tips on you must give your child's SSN to the payer of
Interest and Ordinary DividendsYour Tax Return, earlier. interest on an account owned by your child,
even though the interest is paid to you as custo-❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From SeriesHow to report allocated tips. If you do not dian.EE and I U.S. Savings Bondsmeet either of the exceptions above, report the Issued After 1989 Penalty for failure to supply SSN. If youtotal of box 1 and box 8 of your Forms(s) W-2 as
do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,wages on Form 1040, line 7. (You cannot file ❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record
you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure toForm 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Redemption of Series EE and I
supply social security number under Penalties inBecause social security and Medicare taxes U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After
chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.were not withheld from the allocated tips, you 1989
must report those taxes as additional tax on your
Backup withholding. Your interest income isreturn. Complete Form 4137, and include the
allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report- generally not subject to regular withholding.
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
not reported to your employer  under Reporting ing to ensure that income tax is collected on theGeneral InformationTips on Your Tax Return, earlier. income. Under backup withholding, the payer of
interest must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofA few items of general interest are covered here.
the amount you are paid.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a Backup withholding may also be required if
list showing sources and interest the IRS has determined that you underreported
amounts received during the year. your interest or dividend income. For more infor-
RECORDS
Also, keep the forms you receive showing your mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter 4.
interest income (Forms 1099-INT, for example)7. Reporting backup withholding. If backupas an important part of your records.
withholding is deducted from your interest in-
come, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INTTax on investment income of certain chil- for the year indicating the amount withheld. TheInterest Income dren. Part of a child's 2010 investment income Form 1099-INT will show any backup withhold-may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If so, Form ing as ªFederal income tax withheld.º8615, Tax for Certain Children Who Have In-
vestment Income of More Than $1,900, must be Joint accounts. If two or more persons holdReminder completed and attached to the child's tax return. property (such as a savings account or bond) asIf not, Form 8615 is not required and the child's joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenantsForeign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi- income is taxed at his or her own tax rate. in common, each person's share of any interestzen with interest income from sources outside Some parents can choose to include the from the property is determined by local law.the United States (foreign income), you must child's interest and dividends on the parent's
report that income on your tax return unless it is return. If you can, use Form 8814, Parents' Elec- Income from property given to a child.exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you tion To Report Child's Interest and Dividends, Property you give as a parent to your child underreside inside or outside the United States and for this purpose. the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, thewhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the For more information about the tax on invest- Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar lawforeign payer. ment income of children and the parents' elec- becomes the child's property.tion, see chapter 31. Income from the property is taxable to the
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legalBeneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest obligation to support the child is taxable to theyou receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust parent or guardian having that legal obligation.Introduction is generally taxable income. You should receive
a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Savings account with parent as trustee.This chapter discusses the following topics.
Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from Interest income from a savings account opened• Different types of interest income. the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its for a minor child but placed in the name and
• What interest is taxable and what interest instructions will tell you where to report the in- subject to the order of the parents as trustees, is
is nontaxable. come on your Form 1040. taxable to the child if, under the law of the state
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 55

Page 58 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in which the child resides, both of the following Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- the minimum deposit required for a certificate of
ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart- deposit from the institution and the interest youare true.
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not taxable. This earn on the certificate are two separate items.• The savings account legally belongs to the includes interest paid on dividends on converted You must report the total interest you earn onchild. United States Government Life Insurance and the certificate in your income. If you itemize
on National Service Life Insurance policies. deductions, you can deduct the interest you pay• The parents are not legally permitted to
as investment interest, up to the amount of youruse any of the funds to support the child.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). net investment income. See Interest Expenses
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. in chapter 3 of Publication 550.Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You
reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar generally do not include it in your income until Example. You deposited $5,000 with astatement, by banks, savings and loans, and you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap- bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toother payers of interest. This form shows you the ter 17. make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredinterest you received during the year. Keep this to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-form for your records. You do not have to attach tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2010, but you
it to your tax return. received only $265, which represented the $575
Report on your tax return the total interest you earned minus $310 interest charged on yourTaxable Interest
income you receive for the tax year. $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form
1099-INT for 2010 showing the $575 interestTaxable interest includes interest you receiveInterest not reported on Form 1099-INT. you earned. The bank also gives you a state-from bank accounts, loans you make to others,Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you ment showing that you paid $310 interest forand other sources. The following are somemust still report all of your taxable interest in- 2010. You must include the $575 in your in-sources of taxable interest.come. For example, you may receive distributive come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo- Dividends that are actually interest. Certain ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectrations. This interest is reported to you on distributions commonly called dividends are ac- to the net investment income limit.Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1 tually interest. You must report as interest(Form 1120S). Gift for opening account. If you receive non-so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on share
cash gifts or services for making deposits or foraccounts in:Nominees. Generally, if someone receives opening an account in a savings institution, youinterest as a nominee for you, that person will • Cooperative banks, may have to report the value as interest.give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or• Credit unions,received on your behalf. services valued at more than $10 must be re-If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes • Domestic building and loan associations, ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 oramounts belonging to another person, see the more, gifts or services valued at more than $20• Domestic savings and loan associations,discussion on nominee distributions under How must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi- • Federal savings and loan associations, mined by the cost to the financial institution.
cation 550, or Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) and
instructions. Example. You open a savings account at• Mutual savings banks.
your local bank and deposit $800. The accountIncorrect amount. If you receive a Form
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or The ªdividendsº will be shown as interest income culator. If no other interest is credited to yourother incorrect information), you should ask the on Form 1099-INT. account during the year, the Form 1099-INT youissuer for a corrected form. The new Form
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor- Money market funds. Money market funds must report $35 interest income on your taxrected.º pay dividends and are offered by nonbank finan- return.
cial institutions, such as mutual funds and stock
Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income Interest on insurance dividends. Interest onbrokerage houses. Generally, amounts you re-
also may be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-ceive from money market funds should be re-
Issue Discount. For more information about surance company that can be withdrawn annu-ported as dividends, not as interest.
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to
Certificates of deposit and other deferredDiscount (OID), later in this chapter. your account. However, if you can withdraw it
interest accounts. If you open any of these only on the anniversary date of the policy (or
accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals other specified date), the interest is taxable inExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest
of 1 year or less during the term of the account. the year that date occurs.dividends you receive from a mutual fund or
You generally must include this interest in yourother regulated investment company are not in- Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increaseincome when you actually receive it or are enti-cluded in your taxable income. (However, see in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,tled to receive it without paying a substantialInformation-reporting requirement , next.) Ex- advance premiums, or premium deposit funds ispenalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-empt-interest dividends should be shown in box interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single8 of Form 1099-INT. You do not reduce your ums due on insurance policies or made avail-payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forbasis for distributions that are exempt-interest able for you to withdraw.more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discountdividends. (OID), later. U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,Information-reporting requirement. Al- such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,Interest subject to penalty for early with-though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- issued by any agency or instrumentality of thedrawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredable, you must show them on your tax return if United States is taxable for federal income taxinterest account before maturity, you may haveyou have to file. This is an information-reporting purposes.to pay a penalty. You must report the totalrequirement and does not change the ex- amount of interest paid or credited to your ac- Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receiveempt-interest dividends into taxable income. count during the year, without subtracting the on tax refunds is taxable income.penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from Interest on condemnation award. If the con-ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for morespecified private activity bonds may be subject demning authority pays you interest to compen-information on how to report the interest andto the alternative minimum tax. See Alternative sate you for a delay in payment of an award, thededuct the penalty.Minimum Tax  in chapter 30 for more informa- interest is taxable.tion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains a Money borrowed to invest in certificate of
discussion on private activity bonds under State deposit. The interest you pay on money bor- Installment sale payments. If a contract for
or Local Government Obligations. rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet the sale or exchange of property provides for
Page 56 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 59 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deferred payments, it also usually provides for charged or on which interest is charged at a rate at a discount. The face value is payable to you at
interest payable with the deferred payments. below the applicable federal rate. See Be- maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issued
That interest is taxable when you receive it. If low-Market Loans  in chapter 1 of Publication at their face value. The face value plus accrued
little or no interest is provided for in a deferred 550 for more information. interest is payable to you at maturity.
payment contract, part of each payment may be Owners of paper series E and EE bonds can
treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and convert them to electronic bonds. These con-U.S. Savings BondsOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, In- verted bonds do not retain the denomination
stallment Sales. listed on the paper certificate but are posted atThis section provides tax information on U.S.
their purchase price (with accrued interest).savings bonds. It explains how to report theInterest on annuity contract. Accumulated
interest income on these bonds and how to treatinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its Series I bonds. Series I bonds were firsttransfers of these bonds.maturity date is taxable. offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-For other information on U.S. savingsUsurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- ity period of 30 years. The face value plus allbonds, write to:est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.
interest unless state law automatically changes For series EE and I: Reporting options for cash method tax-it to a payment on the principal. Bureau of the Public Debt payers. If you use the cash method of report-Division of Customer AssistanceInterest income on frozen deposits. Ex- ing income, you can report the interest on seriesP.O. Box 7012clude from your gross income interest on frozen EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of theParkersburg, WV 26106-7012deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the following ways.year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-
For series HH/H:posit because: 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest
Bureau of the Public Debt until the earlier of the year you cash or• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- Division of Customer Assistance dispose of the bonds or the year they ma-solvent, or P.O. Box 2186 ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186• The state where the institution is located later.) 
has placed limits on withdrawals because Note. Series E and EE bonds issued inOr, on the Internet, visit:other financial institutions in the state are 1980 matured in 2010. If you have usedwww.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-bankrupt or insolvent. method 1, you generally must report theucts/products.htm.
 interest on these bonds on your 2010 re-
The amount of interest you must exclude is turn.Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-the interest that was credited on the frozen de- 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increasecrual method of accounting, you must reportposits minus the sum of: in redemption value as interest each year.interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it
• The net amount you withdrew from these accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest You must use the same method for all series EE,deposits during the year, and until you receive it or until the bonds mature. series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doAccrual methods of accounting are explained in• The amount you could have withdrawn as not choose method 2 by reporting the increasechapter 1 under Accounting Methods.of the end of the year (not reduced by any in redemption value as interest each year, you
penalty for premature withdrawals of a must use method 1.Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash
time deposit). method of accounting, as most individual tax- If you plan to cash your bonds in thepayers do, you generally report the interest onIf you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- same year you will pay for higher edu-U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. Thecome on deposits that were frozen at the end of cation expenses, you may want to use
TIPcash method of accounting is explained in chap-2010, see Frozen deposits under How To Re- method 1 because you may be able to excludeter 1 under Accounting Methods . But see Re-port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication the interest from your income. To learn how, seeporting options for cash method taxpayers, later.550, for information about reporting this interest Education Savings Bond Program, later.
income exclusion on your tax return. Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issued Change from method 1. If you want toat face value. Interest is paid twice a year byThe interest you exclude is treated as credited change your method of reporting the interestdirect deposit to your bank account. If you are ato your account in the following year. You must from method 1 to method 2, you can do socash method taxpayer, you must report interestinclude it in income in the year you can withdraw without permission from the IRS. In the year ofon these bonds as income in the year you re-it. change you must report all interest accrued toceive it. date and not previously reported for all yourSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980Example. $100 of interest was credited on bonds.and last offered in August 2004. Before 1980,your frozen deposit during the year. You with- Once you choose to report the interest eachseries H bonds were issued. Series H bonds aredrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of year, you must continue to do so for all seriestreated the same as series HH bonds. If you arethe end of the year. You must include $80 in EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and fora cash method taxpayer, you must report theyour income and exclude $20 from your income any you get later, unless you request permissioninterest when you receive it.for the year. You must include the $20 in your to change, as explained next.Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30income for the year you can withdraw it.
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. Change from method 2. To change fromBonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-Series EE and series I bonds. Interest ondiscount when interest has been defaulted or sion from the IRS. Permission for the change isthese bonds is payable when you redeem thewhen the interest has accrued but has not been automatically granted if you send the IRS abonds. The difference between the purchasepaid, the transaction is described as trading a statement that meets all the following require-price and the redemption value is taxable inter-bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not ments. est.income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.
When you receive a payment of that interest, it is Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were 1. You have typed or printed the following
a return of capital that reduces the remaining first offered in January 1980 and have a maturity number at the top: ª131º.
cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues period of 30 years. 2. It includes your name and social securityafter the date of purchase, however, is taxable Before July 1980, series E bonds were is- number under ª131º.interest income for the year it is received or sued. The original 10-year maturity period ofaccrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest 3. It includes the year of change (both theseries E bonds has been extended to 40 yearsDates, later, for more information. beginning and ending dates).for bonds issued before December 1965 and 30
Below-market loans. In general, a be- years for bonds issued after November 1965. 4. It identifies the savings bonds for which
low-market loan is a loan on which no interest is Paper series EE and series E bonds are issued you are requesting this change.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Page 60 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year of reissue your share of all the interestTable 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
earned on the bonds that you have not previ-
ously reported. The former co-owner does not
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... have to include in gross income at the time of
reissue his or her share of the interest earnedyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
that was not reported before the transfer. Thisanother person as co-owners, using only your
interest, however, as well as all interest earnedown funds
after the reissue, is income to the former
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. co-owner.
who is the sole owner of the bond This income-reporting rule also applies when
the bonds are reissued in the name of youryou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But theco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
new co-owner will report only his or her share ofpurchase price
the interest earned after the transfer.
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally jointly are reissued to each of you separately inproperty report one-half of the interest. the same proportion as your contribution to the
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner
has to report at that time the interest earned
5. It includes your agreement to: child or you and your spouse, interest on the before the bonds were reissued.
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac- bought the bond. Example 1. You and your spouse eachquired during or after the year of spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesOne co-owner's funds used.  If you usedchange when the interest is realized EE savings bond. The bond was issued to youyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxupon disposition, redemption, or final and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-on the interest. This is true even if you let thematurity, whichever is earliest, and pone reporting interest on the bond. You laterother co-owner redeem the bond and keep all
b. Report all interest on the bonds ac- have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, onethe proceeds. Under these circumstances, the
quired before the year of change when in your name and one in your spouse's name. Atco-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a
the interest is realized upon disposition, that time neither you nor your spouse has toForm 1099-INT at the time of redemption and
redemption, or final maturity, whichever report the interest earned to the date of reissue.must provide you with another Form 1099-INT
is earliest, with the exception of the in- showing the amount of interest from the bond
terest reported in prior tax years. Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEtaxable to you. The co-owner who redeemed the
savings bond entirely with your own funds. Thebond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee distributions
You must attach this statement to your tax bond was issued to you and your spouse asunder How To Report Interest Income in chapter
return for the year of change, which you must file co-owners. You both postpone reporting interest1 of Publication 550 for more information about
by the due date (including extensions). on the bond. You later have the bond reissuedhow a person who is a nominee reports interest
You can have an automatic extension of 6 as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one inincome belonging to another person.
months from the due date of your return for the your spouse's name. You must report half the
Both co-owners' funds used. If you andyear of change (excluding extensions) to file the interest earned to the date of reissue.
the other co-owner each contribute part of thestatement with an amended return. On the state-
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, seriesbond's purchase price, the interest is generallyment, type or print ªFiled pursuant to section
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to ataxable to each of you, in proportion to the301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you must
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you mustamount each of you paid.have filed your original return for the year of the
include in your income for that year the interestchange by the due date (including extensions). Community property. If you and your earned to the date of transfer if you have notspouse live in a community property state andBy the date you file the original state- already reported it. However, if you are consid-hold bonds as community property, one-half ofment with your return, you must also ered the owner of the trust and if the increase inthe interest is considered received by each ofsend a signed copy to the address be- value both before and after the transfer contin-
you. If you file separate returns, each of youlow. ues to be taxable to you, you can continue togenerally must report one-half of the bond inter- defer reporting the interest earned each year.est. For more information about communityInternal Revenue Service You must include the total interest in your in-property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings come in the year you cash or dispose of theerty.Branch) bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,
P.O. Box 7604 whichever is earlier.Table 7-1. These rules are also shown in
Benjamin Franklin Station The same rules apply to previously unre-Table 7-1.
Washington, DC 20044 ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if
Ownership transferred. If you bought series the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourIf you use a private delivery service, send the series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the
own funds and had them reissued in yoursigned copy to the address below. series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds
co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, traded, later.
you must include in your gross income for theInternal Revenue Service Decedents. The manner of reporting interestyear of reissue all interest that you earned onAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,these bonds and have not previously reported.Rulings Branch) after the death of the owner, depends on theBut, if the bonds were reissued in your nameRoom 5336 accounting and income-reporting methods pre-alone, you do not have to report the interest1111 Constitution Avenue, NW viously used by the decedent. This is explainedaccrued at that time.Washington, DC 20224 in chapter 1 of Publication 550.This same rule applies when bonds (other
Instead of filing this statement, you can re- than bonds held as community property) are Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-quest permission to change from method 2 to transferred between spouses or incident to di- porting the interest on your series EE or series Emethod 1 by filing Form 3115, Application for vorce. bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomeChange in Accounting Method. In that case, Purchased jointly. If you and a co-owner when you traded the bonds for series HH orfollow the form instructions for an automatic each contributed funds to buy series E, series series H bonds, unless you received cash in thechange. No user fee is required. EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-
the names of co-owners, such as you and your you must include in your gross income for the not trade any other series of bonds for series HH
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 61 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bonds.) Any cash you received is income up to plan. The interest shown on your Form Eligible educational institutions. These
the amount of the interest earned on the bonds institutions include most public, private, and1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-
traded. When your series HH or series H bonds nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalest portion of the amount taxable as a
mature, or if you dispose of them before matur- schools that are accredited and eligible to par-distribution from the plan and not taxable
ity, you report as interest the difference between ticipate in student aid programs run by the U.S.as interest. (This amount is generally
their redemption value and your cost. Your cost Department of Education.shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions
is the sum of the amount you paid for the traded From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or Reduction for certain benefits. You mustseries EE or series E bonds plus any amount Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance reduce your qualified higher educational ex-you had to pay at the time of the trade. Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE For more information on including the correct 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
bonds (on which you postponed reporting the amount of interest on your return, see How To ships (see Scholarships and fellowships ininterest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 Report Interest Income , later. Publication 550 chapter 12).in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- includes examples showing how to report these 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time amounts. tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-interest of $523 and a redemption value of 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-empt from state and local taxes. The$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma- tion of distributions from a qualified tuitionForm 1099-INT you receive will indi-turity, when you receive $2,500. You must report
TIP program.cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond$300 as interest income in the year of maturity.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orinterest in box 3.This is the difference between their redemption
inheritances) received for educational ex-value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
penses, such asamount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is Education Savings also the difference between the accrued interest a. Veterans' educational assistance bene-of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 Bond Program fits,cash received on the trade.)
You may be able to exclude from income all or b. Qualified tuition reductions, orChoice to report interest in year of trade. part of the interest you receive on the redemp-You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- c. Employer-provided educational assis-tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theously unreported accrued interest on the series tance.year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds penses during the same year. This exclusion isas income in the year of the trade. If you made 5. Any expense used in figuring the Americanknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.this choice, it is treated as a change from Opportunity and lifetime learning credits.
You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourmethod 1. See Change from method 1  under
filing status is married filing separately.Series EE and series I bonds, earlier. Amount excludable. If the total proceeds
(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your
Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter- savings bonds you redeem during the year areexclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other not more than your adjusted qualified higherForm 1040A.
payer that redeems it must give you a Form educational expenses for the year, you may be
Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you able to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedreceive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form are more than the expenses, you may be able to
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be1099-INT should show the interest as the differ- exclude only part of the interest.
issued either in your name (sole owner) or inence between the amount you received and the To determine the excludable amount, multi-your and your spouse's names (co-owners).amount paid for the bond. However, your Form ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.You must be at least 24 years old before the1099-INT may show more interest than you The numerator of the fraction is the qualifiedbond's issue date. For example, a bond boughthave to include on your income tax return. For higher educational expenses you paid duringby a parent and issued in the name of his or herexample, this may happen if any of the following the year. The denominator of the fraction is thechild under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-are true. total proceeds you received during the year.sion by the parent or child.• You chose to report the increase in the
Example. In February 2010, Mark andThe issue date of a bond may be earlierredemption value of the bond each year.
Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-than the date the bond is purchasedThe interest shown on your Form
ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilbecause the issue date assigned to a1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts
CAUTION
!
1996. They received proceeds of $8,124 repre-bond is the first day of the month in which it ispreviously included in income.
senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofpurchased.• You received the bond from a decedent. $3,124. In 2010, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-The interest shown on your Form ter's college tuition. They are not claiming anBeneficiary. You can designate any individual1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- education credit for that amount, and their(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.est reported by the decedent before death, daughter does not have any tax-free educationalor on the decedent's final return, or by the Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- assistance. They can exclude $1,538 ($3,124 ×estate on the estate's income tax return. sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- ($4,000 ÷  $8,124)) of interest in 2010. They
tion information from the Department of the must pay tax on the remaining $1,586 ($3,124 −• Ownership of the bond was transferred.
$1,538) interest.Treasury.The interest shown on your Form
1099-INT will not be reduced by interest Modified adjusted gross income limit.Qualified expenses. Qualified higher edu-that accrued before the transfer. The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedcational expenses are tuition and fees required
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for• You were named as a co-owner, and the
other co-owner contributed funds to buy whom you claim an exemption) to attend an • $70,100 to $85,100 for taxpayers filing sin-the bond. The interest shown on your eligible educational institution. gle or head of household, andForm 1099-INT will not be reduced by the Qualified expenses include any contribution
• $105,100 to $135,100 for married taxpay-amount you received as nominee for the you make to a qualified tuition program or to a
ers filing jointly or for a qualifyingother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Coverdell education savings account.
widow(er) with dependent child.this chapter, for more information about Qualified expenses do not include expensesthe reporting requirements.) for room and board or for courses involving You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a your modified AGI is equal to or more than the• You received the bond in a taxable distri-
degree or certificate granting program.bution from a retirement or profit-sharing upper limit for your filing status.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The dif- from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.
is adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21 ference between the discounted price you pay See chapter 10 for information on pension and
or Form 1040, line 37) figured before the interest for the bills and the face value you receive at annuity income from nonqualified plans.
exclusion, and modified by adding back any: maturity is interest income. Generally, you re-
port this interest income when the bill is paid at State or Local1. Foreign earned income exclusion, maturity.
Government Obligations2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury
notes have maturity periods of more than 1 year,3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents Interest on a bond used to finance government
ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods forof American Samoa, operations generally is not taxable if the bond is
Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Both issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, generally are issued in denominations of $100 to possession of the United States, or any of their
$1 million and generally pay interest every 65. Exclusion for adoption benefits received political subdivisions.
months. Generally, you report this interest forunder an employer's adoption assistance Bonds issued after 1982 (including tribal ec-the year paid. For more information, see U.S.program, onomic development bonds issued after Febru-Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 of ary 17, 2009) by an Indian tribal government are6. Deduction for student loan interest, and Publication 550. treated as issued by a state. Interest on these
7. Deduction for domestic production activi- bonds is generally tax exempt if the bonds areFor other information on Treasury
ties. part of an issue of which substantially all pro-notes or bonds, write to:
ceeds are to be used in the exercise of any
At the time this publication went to essential government function.Bureau of The Public Debt
print, Congress was considering legis- P.O. Box 7015 For information on federally guaranteedlation that would extend the deduction
CAUTION
! Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015 bonds, mortgage revenue bonds, arbitragefor tuition and fees that expired at the end of bonds, private activity bonds, qualified tax credit2009. If extended, this deduction also would be Or, on the Internet, visit: www. bonds, and Build America bonds, see State oradded back to determine modified AGI. To find treasurydirect.gov/write.htm Local Government Obligations  in chapter 1 ofout if this legislation was enacted, and for more
 Publication 550.details, go to IRS.gov or see Publication 550,
Investment Income and Expenses. Information reporting requirement. If youFor information on series EE, series I, and
Use the worksheet in the instructions for line must file a tax return, you are required to showseries HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings
9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you any tax-exempt interest you received on yourBonds, earlier.
claim any of the exclusion or deduction items return. This is an information-reporting require-
Treasury inflation-protected securitieslisted above (except items 6 and 7), add the ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice aamount of the exclusion or deduction (except est to taxable interest.
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountany deduction for student loan interest or do-
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla-mestic production activities) to the amount on Original Issuetion. For the tax treatment of these securities,line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the total on
see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments  under Discount (OID)Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.
Original Issue Discount (OID) , in PublicationIf you have investment interest expense in-
550. Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-curred to earn royalties and other investment
est. You generally include OID in your income asincome, see Education Savings Bond Program
it accrues over the term of the debt instrument,in chapter 1 of Publication 550. Bonds Sold Between whether or not you receive any payments from
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter- Interest Dates the issuer.
est exclusion, you must keep a written A debt instrument generally has OID whenrecord of the qualified U.S. savings If you sell a bond between interest payment
RECORDS the instrument is issued for a price that is lessbonds you redeem. Your record must include dates, part of the sales price represents interest than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDthe serial number, issue date, face value, and accrued to the date of sale. You must report that is the difference between the stated redemptiontotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter- part of the sales price as interest income for the price at maturity and the issue price.est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 to year of sale. All debt instruments that pay no interestrecord this information. You should also keep If you buy a bond between interest payment before maturity are presumed to be issued at abills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- dates, part of the purchase price represents discount. Zero coupon bonds are one examplementation that shows you paid qualified higher interest accrued before the date of purchase. of these instruments.educational expenses during the year. When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a The OID accrual rules generally do not applyreturn of your capital investment, rather than to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-interest income, by reducing your basis in the turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).U.S. Treasury Bills, bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  inHow To Report Interest Income  in chapter 1 ofNotes, and Bonds chapter 1 of Publication 550.Publication 550 for information on reporting the
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts payment. De minimis OID. You can treat the discount(obligations) of the U.S. Government. as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-InsuranceTaxation of interest. Interest income from plied by the number of full years from the date ofTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi- original issue to maturity. This small discount isfederal income tax but is exempt from all state ciary of the insured person are usually not tax- known as ªde minimisº OID.and local income taxes. You should receive able. But if you receive the proceeds inForm 1099-INT showing the interest (in box 3) installments, you must usually report a part of Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond withpaid to you for the year. each installment payment as interest income. a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,Payments of principal and interest generally issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofFor more information about insurance pro-will be credited to your designated checking or 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10ceeds received in installments, see Publicationsavings account by direct deposit through the (the number of full years from the date of original525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.TreasuryDirect  system. issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will
period. They are issued at a discount in the ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)
Page 60 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 63 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give Example. On September 1, 2008, you
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at you a Form 1099-OID. loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount pounded annually. You are not in the business
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you of lending money. The note stated that principal
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxmust include the OID in income as it accrues and interest would be due on August 31, 2010.
6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingover the term of the bond. In 2010, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-
apply. pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashDebt instrument bought after original is- method, you must include in income on your• You bought the debt instrument after itssue. If you buy a debt instrument with de 2010 return the $508.80 interest you received inoriginal issue and paid a premium or anminimis OID at a premium, the discount is not that year.acquisition premium.includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument
with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount Constructive receipt. You constructively• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
is reported under the market discount rules. See receive income when it is credited to your ac-a stripped coupon (including certain zero
Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica- count or made available to you. You do not needcoupon instruments).
tion 550. to have physical possession of it. For example,
For information about figuring the correct you are considered to receive interest, divi-amount of OID to include in your income, seeExceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments indiscussed in this chapter do not apply to the count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarPublication 1212.following debt instruments. financial institution, or interest on life insurance
policy dividends left to accumulate, when they1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form are credited to your account and subject to yourStripped tax-exempt obligations under 1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yetStripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1 or acquired it from another holder during the entered in your passbook.of Publication 550). year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , You constructively receive income on theearlier, for information about the treatment of2. U.S. savings bonds. deposit or account even if you must:periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a Form 1099-OID for that instrument. • Make withdrawals in multiples of even
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year amounts,
from the date of issue). Certificates of deposit (CDs). If you buy a
• Give a notice to withdraw before makingCD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must4. Obligations issued by an individual before the withdrawal,include in income each year a part of the totalMarch 2, 1984. interest due and report it in the same manner as • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- other OID. draw the earnings, or
ing are true. This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessments with banks, building and loan associa-
a. The lender is not in the business of the interest you are to receive on an earlytions, etc., including:
lending money. withdrawal or redemption is substantially
• Time deposits, less than the interest payable at maturity.b. The amount of the loan, plus the
• Bonus plans,amount of any outstanding prior loans
between the same individuals, is Accrual method. If you use an accrual• Savings certificates,
$10,000 or less. method, you report your interest income when
• Deferred income certificates, you earn it, whether or not you have received it.c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of Interest is earned over the term of the debt• Bonus savings certificates, andthe principal purposes of the loan. instrument.
• Growth savings certificates.
Example. If, in the previous example, youForm 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru- Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener- use an accrual method, you must include thement (or your broker, if you held the instrument ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldthrough a broker) should give you Form CDs not in registered form. They are not issued report the interest as follows: 2008, $80; 2009,1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar in the depositor's name and are transferable $249.60; and 2010, $179.20.statement, if the total OID for the calendar year from one individual to another.is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in box Banks must provide the IRS and the person Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is1, the amount of OID for the part of the year that redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT. taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andyou held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, the
payable. It does not matter when you mail thestated interest you must include in your income. More information. See chapter 1 of Publica- coupon for payment.A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. tion 550 for more information about OID and
Do not file your copy with your return. Keep it for related topics, such as market discount bonds.
your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as How To Report
interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown When To Reporton Form 1099-OID,  later in this discussion, for Interest Income
more information. Interest Income
Generally, you report all your taxable interestForm 1099-OID not received. If you had OID income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, lineWhen to report your interest income depends onfor the year but did not receive a Form 1099-OID 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.whether you use the cash method or an accrualyou can find tables on IRS.gov that list total OID You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestmethod to report income.on certain debt instruments and have informa- income is more than $1,500. Instead, you musttion that will help you figure OID. The tables are Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use use Form 1040A or Form 1040.available at www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ the cash method. If you use this method, you0,,id=213465,00.html. If your debt instrument is generally report your interest income in the year Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule Bnot listed, consult the issuer for further informa- in which you actually or constructively receive it. (Form 1040A or 1040), if you file Form 1040Ation about the accrued OID for the year. However, there are special rules for reporting and any of the following are true. 
Nominee. If someone else is the holder of the discount on certain debt instruments. See
1. Your taxable interest income is more thanrecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru- U.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis-
$1,500.ment belonging to you and receives a Form count, earlier.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 61

Page 64 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther
on a bond you bought between interest taxes.º To take the credit, you may have to fileunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-
payment dates. Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-gram (discussed earlier).
mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit8. You are reporting OID in an amount less3. You received interest from a for Individuals.than the amount shown on Formseller-financed mortgage, and the buyer
1099-OID. U.S. savings bond interest previously re-used the property as a home.
ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for9. Statement (2) in the preceding list under4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. U.S. savings bond interest, the form may showForm 1040 is true.savings bond interest that includes interest you do not have to report. See Formamounts you reported before 2010. In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-
amount received from each. If you received a lier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.5. You received, as a nominee, interest that
Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-actually belongs to someone else. On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer. line 1, report all the interest shown on your Form6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.Reporting tax-exempt interest. Total youron frozen deposits.
tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal7. You are reporting OID in an amount less OID on certain state and municipal bonds) and of all interest listed on line 1.than the amount shown on Form exempt-interest dividends from a mutual fund as1099-OID. 2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savingsshown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. Add this
Bond Interest Previously Reportedº andamount to any other tax-exempt interest you8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
enter amounts previously reported or inter-received. Report the total on line 8b of Formon a bond you bought between interest
est accrued before you received the bond.1040A or 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, enterpayment dates.
ªTEIº and the amount in the space to the left of 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 line 2. Do not add tax-exempt interest in the total and enter the result on line 2.and choose to reduce interest income from on Form 1040EZ, line 2.the bonds by any amortizable bond pre- Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subjectmium (see Bond Premium Amortization in More information. For more informationto the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251,chapter 3 of Publication 550). about how to report interest income, see chapterAlternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al-
1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for theready included in the amount in box 8. Do notList each payer's name and the amount of inter- form you must file.add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract from, theest income received from each payer on line 1. If
amount in box 8.you received a Form 1099-INT or Form
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- Do not report interest from an individ-age firm as the payer. ual retirement account (IRA) as
You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
!
Form 1040, as described next.
Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income, 8.Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andof Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form
1. You forfeited interest income because of 1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable
Dividends andthe early withdrawal of a time deposit; interest income you received. You must report
all of your taxable interest income even if you do2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987, not receive a Form 1099-INT. Contact your fi-you choose to reduce interest income from Othernancial institution if you do not receive a Formthe bonds by any amortizable bond pre- 1099-INT by February 15.mium, and you are deducting the excess of If you forfeited interest income because of Distributionsbond premium amortization for the accrual the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-period over the qualified stated interest for ductible amount will be shown on Formthe period (see Bond Premium Amortiza- 1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-tion in chapter 3 of Publication 550); or Reminderdrawal of savings  in chapter 1 of Publication
3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- 550.
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the interest Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with
1986. income you received from U.S. savings bonds, dividend income from sources outside the
Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and Treasury United States (foreign income), you must report
Schedule B. You must complete Schedule bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 to any that income on your tax return unless it is ex-
B (Form 1040A or 1040), if you file Form 1040 other taxable interest income you received, un- empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
and any of the following apply. less part of the amount in box 3 was previously side inside or outside the United States and
included in your interest income. If part of the whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the1. Your taxable interest income is more than amount shown in box 3 was previously included foreign payer.$1,500. in your interest income, see U.S. savings bond
interest previously reported, later.2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
Box 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income taxunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-
withheld) will contain an amount if you weregram (discussed earlier). Introductionsubject to backup withholding. Report the3. You received interest from a amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, lineused the property as a home. • Ordinary dividends,61(federal income tax withheld).
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. • Capital gain distributions,
expenses you may be able to deduct as ansavings bond interest that includes • Nondividend distributions, anditemized deduction. See chapter 28  for moreamounts you reported before 2010.
information about investment expenses. • Other distributions you may receive from a5. You received, as a nominee, interest that If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form corporation or a mutual fund.actually belongs to someone else. 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest able to take a credit for the amount shown in box This chapter also explains how to report divi-
on frozen deposits. 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this dend income on your tax return.
Page 62 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions

Page 65 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
  Dividends are distributions of money, stock, income. Under backup withholding, the payer of
or other property paid to you by a corporation or dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% of Ordinary Dividendsby a mutual fund. You also may receive divi- the amount you are paid.
dends through a partnership, an estate, a trust, Backup withholding may also be required if Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-or an association that is taxed as a corporation. the IRS has determined that you underreported mon type of distribution from a corporation or aHowever, some amounts you receive that are your interest or dividend income. For more infor- mutual fund. They are paid out of earnings andcalled dividends are actually interest income. mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter 4. profits and are ordinary income to you. This(See Dividends that are actually interest  under means they are not capital gains. You can as-Taxable Interest in chapter 7.) Stock certificate in two or more names. If sume that any dividend you receive on commonMost distributions are paid in cash (or two or more persons hold stock as joint tenants, or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlesscheck). However, distributions can consist of tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common, the paying corporation or mutual fund tells youmore stock, stock rights, other property, or serv- each person's share of any dividends from the otherwise. Ordinary dividends will be shown inices. stock is determined by local law. box 1a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive.
Useful Items Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations and mu- Qualified DividendsYou may want to see: tual funds use Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and
Distributions, to show you the distributions you Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividendsPublication received from them during the year. Keep this subject to the same 0% or 15% maximum taxform with your records. You do not have to❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals rate that applies to net capital gain. They shouldattach it to your tax return. be shown in box 1b of the Form 1099-DIV you❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses receive.Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.
Qualified dividends are subject to the 15%Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youForm (and Instructions)
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply ismust still report all your taxable dividend in-
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) 25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldcome. For example, you may receive distributive
Interest and Ordinary Dividends apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends areshares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-
subject to the 0% rate.porations. These dividends are reported to you
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 To qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate,
(Form 1120S). all of the following requirements must be met.
Reporting tax withheld. If tax is withheldGeneral Information • The dividends must have been paid by a
from your dividend income, the payer must give U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-
This section discusses general rules for divi- you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amount poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-
dend income. withheld. tion later.)
Nominees. If someone receives distribu- • The dividends are not of the type listedTax on investment income of certain chil-
tions as a nominee for you, that person will give later under Dividends that are not qualifieddren. Part of a child's 2010 investment income
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu- dividends.may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If it is,
tions received on your behalf.Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children Who Have • You meet the holding period (discussedInvestment Income of More Than $1,900, must next).be completed and attached to the child's tax Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-
return. If not, Form 8615 is not required and the ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest
Holding period. You must have held the stockchild's income is taxed at his or her own tax rate. received by a broker on your behalf must be
Some parents can choose to include the for more than 60 days during the 121-day periodreported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscella-
child's interest and dividends on the parent's that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.neous Income, or a similar statement. See Re-
return if certain requirements are met. If you can, The ex-dividend date is the first date followingporting Substitute Payments under Short Sales
use Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report the declaration of a dividend on which the buyerin chapter 4 of Publication 550 for more informa-
Child's Interest and Dividends, for this purpose. of a stock is not entitled to receive the nexttion about reporting these payments.
For more information about the tax on invest- dividend payment. Instead, the seller will get the
ment income of children and the parents' elec- dividend.Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If
tion, see chapter 31. When counting the number of days you heldyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
the stock, include the day you disposed of theamount (or other incorrect information), youBeneficiary of an estate or trust. Dividends stock, but not the day you acquired it. See theshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. Theand other distributions you receive as a benefi- examples later.new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor-ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxable
rected.ºincome. You should receive a Schedule K-1 Exception for preferred stock. In the case
(Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income, of preferred stock, you must have held the stock
Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary. more than 90 days during the 181-day period
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after aYour copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructions that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date
dividend is declared but before it is paid, thewill tell you where to report the income on your if the dividends are due to periods totaling more
owner of record (usually the payee shown on theForm 1040. than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due
dividend check) must include the dividend in to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-Social security number (SSN).  You must income. ing period in the previous paragraph applies.give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayer
identification number (ITIN)) to any person re- Dividends received in January. If a mutual Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares ofquired by federal tax law to make a return, state- fund (or other regulated investment company) or XYZ Corp. common stock on July 8, 2010. XYZment, or other document that relates to you. This real estate investment trust (REIT) declares a Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents perincludes payers of dividends. If you do not give dividend (including any exempt-interest divi- share. The ex-dividend date was July 16, 2010.your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, you dend or capital gain distribution) in October, Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsmay have to pay a penalty. November, or December payable to sharehold- $500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxFor more information on SSNs and ITINs, ers of record on a date in one of those months 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold thesee Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7. but actually pays the dividend during January of 5,000 shares on August 11, 2010. You held your
shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of thethe next calendar year, you are considered toBackup withholding. Your dividend income
121-day period (from July 9, 2010, through Au-have received the dividend on December 31.is generally not subject to regular withholding.
gust 11, 2010). The 121-day period began onYou report the dividend in the year it was de-However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
May 17, 2010 (60 days before the ex-dividending to ensure that income tax is collected on the clared.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions Page 63

Page 66 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
date), and ended on September 14, 2010. You the dividends are paid or during its previous tax Table 8-1. Income Tax Treaties
have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- year.
cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 Income tax treaties the United States hasReadily tradable stock. Any stock (such asdays. with the following countries satisfycommon, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) or requirement (2) under Qualified foreignan American depositary receipt in respect of that corporation.Example 2. Assume the same facts as in stock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if itExample 1 except that you bought the stock on Australia Indonesia Romaniais listed on one of the following securities mar-July 15, 2010 (the day before the ex-dividend kets: the New York Stock Exchange, the Austria Ireland Russiandate), and you sold the stock on September 16, NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex- Bangladesh Israel Federation2010. You held the stock for 63 days (from July change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin- Barbados Italy Slovak16, 2010, through September 16, 2010). The nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock Belgium Jamaica Republic$500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, or Canada Japan Sloveniayour Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends the Pacific Exchange, Inc. China Kazakhstan South Africabecause you held the stock for 61 days of the
Cyprus Korea Spain121-day period (from July 16, 2010, through Dividends that are not qualified dividends.
Czech Latvia Sri LankaSeptember 14, 2010). The following dividends are not qualified divi-
Republic Lithuania Swedendends. They are not qualified dividends even if
Denmark Luxembourg SwitzerlandExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares of they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.
Egypt Mexico ThailandABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 8, • Capital gain distributions. Estonia Morocco Trinidad and2010. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of
Finland Netherlands Tobago10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July • Dividends paid on deposits with mutual
France New Zealand Tunisia16, 2010. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you savings banks, cooperative banks, credit
Germany Norway Turkeythat the portion of the dividend eligible to be unions, U.S. building and loan associa-
treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per tions, U.S. savings and loan associations, Greece Pakistan Ukraine
share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual federal savings and loan associations, and Hungary Philippines United
Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 similar financial institutions. (Report these Iceland Poland Kingdom
and qualified dividends of $200. However, you amounts as interest income.) India Portugal Venezuela
sold the 10,000 shares on August 11, 2010. You • Dividends from a corporation that is ahave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund erative during the corporation's tax year instock for less than 61 days. which the dividends were paid or during Dividends Used to BuyHolding period reduced where risk of loss the corporation's previous tax year.
More Stockis diminished. When determining whether • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-you met the minimum holding period discussed ployer securities held on the date of record The corporation in which you own stock mayearlier, you cannot count any day during which by an employee stock ownership plan have a dividend reinvestment plan. This planyou meet any of the following conditions. (ESOP) maintained by that corporation. lets you choose to use your dividends to buy
1. You had an option to sell, were under a (through an agent) more shares of stock in the• Dividends on any share of stock to the
contractual obligation to sell, or had made extent you are obligated (whether under a corporation instead of receiving the dividends in
(and not closed) a short sale of substan- short sale or otherwise) to make related cash. Most mutual funds also permit sharehold-tially identical stock or securities. payments for positions in substantially ers to automatically reinvest distributions in
similar or related property. more shares in the fund, instead of receiving2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to
cash. If you use your dividends to buy morebuy substantially identical stock or securi- • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if
ties. stock at a price equal to its fair market value, youyou know or have reason to know the pay-
still must report the dividends as income.ments are not qualified dividends.3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-one or more other positions in substantially • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a pricesimilar or related property. 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
less than its fair market value, you must reportyou know or have reason to know the pay-For information about how to apply condition as dividend income the fair market value of thements are not qualified dividends.(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5. additional stock on the dividend payment date.
Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor- You also must report as dividend income anyporation is a qualified foreign corporation if it service charge subtracted from your cash divi-meets any of the following conditions. dends before the dividends are used to buy the
additional stock. But you may be able to deduct1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.
the service charge. See chapter 28  for morepossession.
information about deducting expenses of pro-2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits ducing income.of a comprehensive income tax treaty with
In some dividend reinvestment plans, youthe United States that the Treasury De-
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at apartment determines is satisfactory for this
price less than fair market value. If you choosepurpose and that includes an exchange of
to do this, you must report as dividend incomeinformation program. For a list of those
the difference between the cash you invest andtreaties, seeTable 8-1.
the fair market value of the stock you buy. When3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2) figuring this amount, use the fair market value ofabove, but the stock for which the dividend the stock on the dividend payment date.is paid is readily tradable on an estab-
lished securities market in the United
States. See Readily tradable stock, later. Money Market Funds
Report amounts you receive from money marketException. A corporation is not a qualified
funds as dividend income. Money market fundsforeign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-
are a type of mutual fund and should not bevestment company during its tax year in which
Page 64 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions

Page 67 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in (the redemption premium) generally is taxableconfused with bank money market accounts that
chapter 14. as a constructive distribution of additional stockpay interest. 
on the preferred stock. For more information,
Example. You bought stock in 1997 for see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
$100. In 2000, you received a nondividend dis-
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-tribution of $80. You did not include this amount
Capital Gain ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketin your income, but you reduced the basis of
value when distributed. If you receive stock oryour stock to $20. You received a nondividend
Distributions stock rights that are not taxable to you, seedistribution of $30 in 2010. The first $20 of this
Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentamount reduced your basis to zero. You report
Capital gain distributions (also called capital Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to mation on how to figure their basis.2010. You must report as a long-term capital
your account by mutual funds (or other regu- gain any nondividend distribution you receive on
Fractional shares. You may not own enoughlated investment companies) and real estate this stock in later years.
stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofinvestment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in
stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from Liquidating Distributions dend. However, with the approval of the share-the mutual fund or REIT.
holders, the corporation may set up a plan inReport capital gain distributions as long-term  Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq- which fractional shares are not issued but in-capital gains regardless of how long you owned uidating dividends, are distributions you receive stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givenyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor- to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forporation. These distributions are, at least in part,Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds fractional shares under such a plan is treated asone form of a return of capital. They may be paidand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalin one or more installments. You will receive akeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on shares. You must determine your gain or lossForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showingthem. You must treat your share of these gains and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-you the amount of the liquidating distribution inas distributions, even though you did not actu- ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is thebox 8 or 9.ally receive them. However, they are not in- difference between the cash you receive and theFor more information on liquidating distribu-cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are basis of the fractional shares sold.tions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.reported to you in box 1a of Form 2439, Notice
to Shareholder of Undistributed Long-Term Example. You own one share of commonCapital Gains. stock that you bought on January 3, 2001, forReport undistributed capital gains (box 1a of $100. The corporation declared a common stockForm 2439) as long-term capital gains on Distributions of Stock dividend of 5% on June 30, 2010. The fair mar-Schedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11. ket value of the stock at the time the stockand Stock RightsThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual dividend was declared was $200. You were paidfund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under  Distributions by a corporation of its own stockYou take credit for this tax by including it on a plan described in the above paragraph. Youare commonly known as stock dividends. StockForm 1040, line 71, and checking box a on that figure your gain or loss as follows:rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri-line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theand keep Copy C for your records. Fair market value of old stock .... . $200.00corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends
Fair market value of stock dividendBasis adjustment. Increase your basis in and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you (cash received) .............. .  +10.00your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by do not report them on your return. Fair market value of old stock andthe difference between the gain you report and stock dividend ............... . $210.00Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.the credit you claim for the tax paid.
Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights Basis (cost) of old stock after theAdditional information. For more information are taxable to you if any of the following apply. stock dividend (($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) $95.24on the treatment of distributions from mutual Basis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷1. You or any other shareholder have thefunds, see Publication 550. $210) ×  $100) ............... . + 4.76choice to receive cash or other property Total ..................... . $100.00instead of stock or stock rights.
Cash received ............... . $10.00
2. The distribution gives cash or other prop- Basis (cost) of stock dividend ..... . − 4.76
Nondividend erty to some shareholders and an increase Gain $5.24
in the percentage interest in the corpora- Because you had held the share of stock forDistributions tion's assets or earnings and profits to more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendother shareholders. was declared, your gain on the stock dividend isA nondividend distribution is a distribution that is 3. The distribution is in convertible preferred a long-term capital gain.not paid out of the earnings and profits of a stock and has the same result as in (2).corporation or a mutual fund. You should re- Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-
ceive a Form 1099-DIV or other statement 4. The distribution gives preferred stock to clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip
showing the nondividend distribution. On Form some common stock shareholders and certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.
1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution will be common stock to other common stock The certificate is generally nontaxable when you
shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a shareholders. receive it. If you choose to have the corporation
statement, you report the distribution as an ordi- sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thenary dividend. ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-distribution, however, is not taxable if it is tween the proceeds and the portion of your basisBasis adjustment. A nondividend distribution an increase in the conversion ratio of con- in the corporation's stock allocated to the certifi-reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed vertible preferred stock made solely to take cate.until your basis in the stock is fully recovered. into account a stock dividend, stock split, However, if you receive a scrip certificateThis nontaxable portion is also called a return of or similar event that would otherwise result that you can choose to redeem for cash insteadcapital. It is a return of your investment in the in reducing the conversion right.) of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-stock of the company. If you buy stock in a The term ªstockº includes rights to acquire ceive it. You must include its fair market value incorporation in different lots at different times, stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a income on the date you receive it.and you cannot definitely identify the shares holder of rights or of convertible securities.subject to the nondividend distribution, reduce If you receive taxable stock dividends orthe basis of your earliest purchases first. stock rights, include their fair market value at theWhen the basis of your stock has been re- time of distribution in your income.duced to zero, report any additional nondividend Other Distributions
distribution you receive as a capital gain. Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.
Whether you report it as a long-term or If you hold preferred stock having a redemption You may receive any of the following distribu-
short-term capital gain depends on how long price higher than its issue price, the difference tions during the year.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Distributions Page 65

Page 68 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest capital gains, you must use Form 1040. You choose to include in investment income when
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive any figuring the limit on your investment interest de-
other regulated investment company are not in- dividend income. duction. This is done on the Qualified Dividends
cluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Sched-
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichdividends should be shown in box 8 of Form ule D Tax Worksheet. For more information
you received $10 or more in dividends and other1099-INT. about the limit on investment interest, see In-
distributions, you should receive a Form vestment expenses in chapter 23.Information reporting requirement. Al- 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Formthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- Expenses related to dividend income. You1099-DIV, you must report all your taxable divi-able, you must show them on your tax return if may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-dend income.you have to file a return. This is an information dend income if you itemize your deductions onSee Form 1099-DIV for more information onreporting requirement and does not change the Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28  forhow to report dividend income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. general information about deducting expenses
Form 1040A or 1040. You must complete of producing income.Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II, andempt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- More information. For more informationattach it to your Form 1040A or 1040, if:vate activity bonds may be subject to the about how to report dividend income, see chap-
alternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini- • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the
mum Tax in chapter 30 for more information. box 1a) are more than $1,500, or form you must file.
• You received, as a nominee, dividendsDividends on insurance policies. Insurance
that actually belong to someone else.policy dividends the insurer keeps and uses to
pay your premiums are not taxable. However, If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,you must report as taxable interest income the you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.interest that is paid or credited on dividends left
List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachwith the insurance company.
payer's name and the ordinary dividends youIf dividends on an insurance contract (other 9.
received. If your securities are held by a broker-than a modified endowment contract) are distrib-
age firm (in ªstreet nameº), list the name of theuted to you, they are a partial return of the
brokerage firm shown on Form 1099-DIV as thepremiums you paid. Do not include them in your
payer. If your stock is held by a nominee who is Rental Incomegross income until they are more than the total of
the owner of record, and the nominee credited orall net premiums you paid for the contract. Re-
paid you dividends on the stock, show the nameport any taxable distributions on insurance poli- and Expensesof the nominee and the dividends you receivedcies on Form 1040, line 21.
or for which you were credited.
Dividends on veterans' insurance. Divi- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, line Introductioncies are not taxable. In addition, interest on 9a.
dividends left with the Department of Veterans This chapter discusses rental income and ex-Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Affairs is not taxable. penses. It also covers the following topics.dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of
Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box • Personal use of dwelling unit (including
dividends you receive in money from a coopera- 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the vacation home).tive organization are included in your income. amount in box 1b to, or substract it from, the
• Depreciation.Do not include in your income patronage amount in box 1a.
dividends you receive on: Do not include any of the following on line 9b. • Limits on rental losses.
• Property bought for your personal use, or • Qualified dividends you received as a • How to report your rental income and ex-nominee. See Nominees under How to• Capital assets or depreciable property penses.Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 ofbought for use in your business. But you Publication 550.must reduce the basis (cost) of the items If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental
bought. If the dividend is more than the • Dividends on stock for which you did not property, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
adjusted basis of the assets, you must re- meet the holding period. See Holding pe- Dispositions of Assets.port the excess as income. riod earlier under Qualified Dividends. If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of,
rental property, see Publication 547, Casualties,• Dividends on any share of stock to theThese rules are the same whether the cooper- Disasters, and Thefts.extent you are obligated (whether under aative paying the dividend is a taxable or If you rent a condominium or a cooperativeshort sale or otherwise) to make relatedtax-exempt cooperative. apartment, some special rules apply to you evenpayments for positions in substantially
similar or related property. though you receive the same tax treatment asAlaska Permanent Fund dividends.   Do not
other owners of rental property. See Publicationreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re- • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifport these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Form 527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor-you know or have reason to know the pay-1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3. mation.ments are not qualified dividends.
• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box Useful Items1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
You may want to see:you know or have reason to know the pay-How To Report ments are not qualified dividends.
PublicationDividend Income If you have qualified dividends, you must fig- ❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertyure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the ❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed inForm 1040A to report your dividend income. Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- Service Before 1987Report the total of your ordinary dividends on ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report ❏ 535 Business Expensestions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedqualified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 or dividends on line 2 of the worksheet. ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesForm 1040A.
  If you receive capital gain distributions, you Investment interest deducted. If you claim ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertymay be able to use Form 1040A or you may a deduction for investment interest, you may
have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri- have to reduce the amount of your qualified Form (and Instructions)butions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv- dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% tax
idend distributions required to be reported as rate. Reduce it by the qualified dividends you ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
Page 66 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 69 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ Rental of property also used as a home. If Repairs and ImprovementsIndividuals you rent property that you also use as your
home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations the tax year, do not include the rent you receive property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental in your income and do not deduct rental ex- provements. Instead, recover the cost of im-Income and Loss penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule provements by taking depreciation (explainedA (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty later).and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental
Repairs. A repair keeps your property in goodproperty. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
operating condition. It does not materially add to(Including Vacation Home), later.
Rental Income the value of your property or substantially pro-Part interest. If you own a part interest in long its life. Repainting your property inside orrental property, you must report your part of theGenerally, you must include in your gross in- out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-rental income from the property.come all amounts you receive as rent. Rental ing, and replacing broken windows are exam-
income is any payment you receive for the use ples of repairs.
or occupation of property. In addition to amounts If you make repairs as part of an extensive
you receive as normal rent payments, there are remodeling or restoration of your property, the
other amounts that may be rental income. Rental Expenses whole job is an improvement.
Separate the costs of repairs and im-When to report. If you are a cash basis tax- This part discusses expenses of renting prop- provements, and keep accurate rec-payer, you report rental income on your return erty that you ordinarily can deduct from your ords. You will need to know the cost offor the year you actually or constructively re-
RECORDS rental income. It includes information on the improvements when you sell or depreciate yourceive it. You are a cash basis taxpayer if you expenses you can deduct if you rent part of your property.report income in the year you receive it, regard- property, or if you change your property to rentalless of when it was earned. You constructively use. Depreciation, which you can also deduct Improvements. An improvement adds to thereceive income when it is made available to you, from your rental income, is discussed later. value of property, prolongs its useful life, orfor example, by being credited to your bank adapts it to new uses. Improvements include thePersonal use of rental property. If youaccount. following items.sometimes use your rental property for personalFor more information about when you con-
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-structively receive income, see Accounting • Putting a recreation room in an unfinished
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalMethods in chapter 1. basement.
expense deductions may be limited. See Per-
• Paneling a den.Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation
you receive before the period that it covers. Home), later. • Adding a bathroom or bedroom.Include advance rent in your rental income in the
Part interest. If you own a part interest in • Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony.year you receive it regardless of the period cov-
rental property, you can deduct expenses thatered or the method of accounting you use. • Putting up a fence.you paid according to your percentage of owner-
ship. • Putting in new plumbing or wiring.Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent
your property. In the first year, you receive When to deduct. You generally deduct your • Putting in new cabinets.$5,000 for the first year's rent and $5,000 as rent rental expenses in the year you pay them. • Putting on a new roof.for the last year of the lease. You must include
Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your$10,000 in your income in the first year. • Paving a driveway.ordinary and necessary expenses for managing,
Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenant conserving, or maintaining rental property from If you make an improvement to property, thepays you to cancel a lease, the amount you the time you make it available for rent. cost of the improvement must be capitalized.receive is rent. Include the payment in your Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate The capitalized cost can generally be depreci-income in the year you receive it regardless of rental property when it is ready and available for ated as if the improvement were separate prop-your method of accounting. rent. See Placed-in-Service under When Does erty.
Depreciation Begin and End  in chapter 2 ofExpenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays
Publication 527.any of your expenses, the payments are rental Other Expensesincome. You must include them in your income. Vacant rental property. If you hold propertyYou can deduct the expenses if they are deduct- Other expenses you can deduct from your rentalfor rental purposes, you may be able to deductible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses , income include advertising, cleaning and main-your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-later, for more information. tenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance,ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or
taxes, interest, commissions for the collection ofmaintaining the property while the property isProperty or services. If you receive property rent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans-vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss ofor services, instead of money, as rent, include portation, and other expenses, discussed next.rental income for the period the property is va-the fair market value of the property or services cant.in your rental income. Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you
If the services are provided at an agreed pay an insurance premium for more than oneVacant while listed for sale. If you sell prop-
upon or specified price, that price is the fair year in advance, for each year of coverage youerty you held for rental purposes, you can de-
market value unless there is evidence to the can deduct the part of the premium payment thatduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for
contrary. will apply to that year. You cannot deduct themanaging, conserving, or maintaining the prop-
total premium in the year you pay it.erty until it is sold.Security deposits. Do not include a security
deposit in your income when you receive it if you Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax- Local benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the payer, do not deduct uncollected rent. Because deduct charges for local benefits that increase
lease. But if you keep part or all of the security you do not include it in your income, you cannot the value of your property, such as charges for
deposit during any year because your tenant deduct it. putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer
does not live up to the terms of the lease, include If you use an accrual method, you report systems. These charges are nondepreciable
the amount you keep in your income in that year. income when you earn it. If you are unable to capital expenditures, and must be added to the
If an amount called a security deposit is to be collect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as a basis of your property. However, you can deduct
used as a final payment of rent, it is advance business bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica- local benefit taxes that are for maintaining, re-
rent. Include it in your income when you receive tion 535 for more information about business pairing, or paying interest charges for the bene-
it. bad debts. fits.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

Page 70 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental of property. You can deduct the rent At the time this publication went to
print, Congress was considering legis-you pay for property that you use for rental Renting Part oflation that would extend the deductionspurposes. If you buy a leasehold for rental pur-
CAUTION
!
for state and local real estate taxes and a netposes, you can deduct an equal part of the cost Propertyeach year over the term of the lease. disaster loss from Form 4684, if you do not
itemize your deductions. To find out if this legis- If you rent part of your property, you must divide
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the lation was enacted, and for more details, see certain expenses between the part of the prop-
rent you pay for equipment that you use for Publication 527 or go to erty used for rental purposes and the part of the
rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease property used for personal purposes, as thoughwww.irs.gov/formspubs.
contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, you actually had two separate pieces of prop-
you cannot deduct these payments. You can erty.
recover the cost of purchased equipment Where to report. Report your not-for-profit You can deduct the expenses related to the
through depreciation. part of the property used for rental purposes,rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You can
such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort-include your mortgage interest and any qualified
Local transportation expenses.  You can gage insurance premiums, and real estatemortgage insurance premiums (if you use thededuct your ordinary and necessary local trans- taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formproperty as your main home or second home),portation expenses if you incur them to collect 1040). You can also deduct as rental expensesreal estate taxes, and casualty losses on therental income or to manage, conserve, or main- a portion of other expenses that normally areappropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A, iftain your rental property. nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex-you itemize your deductions. penses for electricity or painting the outside ofGenerally, if you use your personal car,
your house.pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you If you itemize, claim your other rental ex-
can deduct the expenses using one of two meth- There is no change in the types of expensespenses, subject to the rules explained in chapter
ods: actual expenses or the standard mileage deductible for the personal-use part of your1 of Publication 535, as miscellaneous itemized
rate. For 2010, the standard mileage rate for property. Generally, these expenses may bedeductions on Form 1040, Schedule A, line 23.each mile of business use is 50 cents a mile. For deducted only if you itemize your deductions onYou can deduct these expenses only if they,more information, see chapter 26. Schedule A (Form 1040).together with certain other miscellaneous item- You cannot deduct any part of the cost of theTo deduct car expenses under either ized deductions, total more than 2% of your first phone line even if your tenants have unlim-method, you must keep records that adjusted gross income. ited use of it.follow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-
RECORDS You do not have to divide the expenses thattion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, and belong only to the rental part of your property.attach it to your tax return. For example, if you paint a room that you rent, or
if you pay premiums for liability insurance inProperty Changed Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- connection with renting a room in your home,
nary and necessary expenses of traveling away your entire cost is a rental expense. If you installto Rental Usefrom home if the primary purpose of the trip was a second phone line strictly for your tenants'
to collect rental income or to manage, conserve, use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-If you change your home or other property (or aor maintain your rental property. You must prop- ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-part of it) to rental use at any time other than theerly allocate your expenses between rental and ciation, discussed later, on the part of the house
nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost beginning of your tax year, you must divide used for rental purposes as well as on the furni-
of traveling away from home if the primary pur- yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance, ture and equipment you use for rental purposes.
pose of the trip was to improve your property. between rental use and personal use.
You recover the cost of improvements by taking How to divide expenses. If an expense is forYou can deduct as rental expenses only thedepreciation. For information on travel ex- both rental use and personal use, such as mort-part of the expense that is for the part of the yearpenses, see chapter 26. gage interest or heat for the entire house, youthe property was used or held for rental pur- must divide the expense between the rental useTo deduct travel expenses, you must poses. and the personal use. You can use any reasona-keep records that follow the rules in
ble method for dividing the expense. It may beAt the time this publication went tochapter 26.
RECORDS
reasonable to divide the cost of some items (forprint, Congress was considering legis-
example, water) based on the number of peoplelation that would extend the deduction
CAUTION
!Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as a using them. The two most common methods forfor real estate taxes when you are taking therental expense, the part of tax return preparation dividing an expense are based on (1) the num-standard deduction. To find out if this legislationfees you paid to prepare Schedule E (Form ber of rooms in your home, and (2) the squarewas enacted, and for more details, see your tax1040), Part I. For example, on your 2010 Sched- footage of your home.form instructions or go to ule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2010 to
www.irs.gov/formspubs.prepare your 2009 Schedule E, Part I. You can
You cannot deduct depreciation or insurancealso deduct, as a rental expense, any expense
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you paid for the part of the year the property was held for Personal Use ofto resolve a tax underpayment related to your personal use. However, you can include the
rental activities. home mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in- Dwelling Unit 
surance premiums, and real estate tax ex-
penses for the part of the year the property was (Including Vacation
held for personal use as an itemized deduction
Home)Not Rented for Profit on Schedule A (Form 1040).
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unitIf you do not rent your property to make a profit, Example. Your tax year is the calendar
(including a vacation home) that you rent, youyou can deduct your rental expenses only up to year. You moved from your home in May and
must divide your expenses between rental usethe amount of your rental income. You cannot started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct
and personal use. See What Is a Day of Per-deduct a loss or carry forward to the next year as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearly
sonal Use and How To Divide Expenses, later.any rental expenses that are more than your expenses, such as taxes and insurance.rental income for the year. For more information  If you used a dwelling unit for personal
Starting with June, you can deduct as rentalabout the rules for an activity not engaged in for purposes, it may be considered a ªdwelling unit
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-profit, see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of used as a home.º If it is, you cannot deduct
Publication 535. ally billed monthly, such as utilities. rental expenses that are more than your rental
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 71 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income for that dwelling unit. See Dwelling Unit This special rule does not apply when dividingExamples
expenses between rental and personal use.Used as Home  and How To Figure Rental In-
The following examples show how to determinecome and Deductions, later. If your dwelling unit
whether you used your rental property as ais not considered a dwelling unit used as a What Is a Dayhome.home, you can deduct rental expenses that are
of Personal Usemore than rental income for the unit subject to
Example 1. You converted the basement ofcertain limits. See Limits on Rental Losses ,
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anyyour home into an apartment with a bedroom, alater. day that the unit is used by any of the followingbathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the
persons.basement apartment at a fair rental price toException for minimal rental use. If you use
college students during the regular school year.the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer 1. You or any other person who has an inter-You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273than 15 days during the year, that period is not est in it, unless you rent it to another ownerdays). You figured 10% of the total days rentedtreated as rental activity. Do not include any of as his or her main home under a sharedto others at a fair rental price is 27 days.the rent in your income and do not deduct any of equity financing agreement (defined later).
the rental expenses. To determine if you use a During June (30 days), your brothers stayed However, see Use as Main Home Before
dwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used with you and lived in the basement apartment or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Used
as Home, later. rent free. as Home, earlier.
Your basement apartment was used as a 2. A member of your family or a member ofDwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a home because you used it for personal pur- the family of any other person who ownshouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home, poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth- an interest in it, unless the family memberboat, vacation home, or similar property. It also ers is considered personal use. Your personal uses the dwelling unit as his or her mainincludes all structures or other property belong- use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14 home and pays a fair rental price. Familying to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has basic days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27 includes only your spouse, brothers andliving accommodations, such as sleeping space, days). sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, an-a toilet, and cooking facilities. cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and   A dwelling unit does not include property Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom lineal descendants (children, grandchild-used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar in your home at a fair rental price during the local ren, etc.).establishment. Property is used solely as a ho- college's homecoming, commencement, and
3. Anyone under an arrangement that letstel, motel, inn, or similar establishment if it is football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your you use some other dwelling unit.regularly available for occupancy by paying cus- sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the
tomers and is not used by an owner as a home last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10% 4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
during the year. of the total days rented to others at a fair rental
price is 3 days. Main home. If the other person or member ofExample. You rent a room in your home The room was used as a home because you the family in (1) or (2) above has more than onethat is always available for short-term occu- used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is home, his or her main home is ordinarily the onepancy by paying customers. You do not use the more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the he or she lived in most of the time.room yourself, and you allow only paying cus- 27 days it was rented (3 days).tomers to use the room. The room is used solely Shared equity financing agreement. This isas a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment Example 3. You own a condominium apart- an agreement under which two or more personsand is not a dwelling unit. ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental acquire undivided interests for more than 50
years in an entire dwelling unit, including theprice for a total of 170 days during the year. For
Dwelling Unit land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-12 of those days, the tenant was not able to use
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main homethe apartment and allowed you to use it evenUsed as Home upon payment of rent to the other co-owner orthough you did not refund any of the rent. Your
owners.family actually used the apartment for 10 ofThe tax treatment of rental income and ex-
those days. Therefore, the apartment is treatedpenses for a dwelling unit that you also use for Donation of use of property. You use aas having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days.personal purposes depends on whether you use dwelling unit for personal purposes if:You figured 10% of the total days rented toit as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income
others at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your • You donate the use of the unit to a charita-and Deductions, later.)
family also used the apartment for 7 other days ble organization,You use a dwelling unit as a home during the
during the year.tax year if you use it for personal purposes more • The organization sells the use of the unitYou used the apartment as a home becausethan the greater of: at a fund-raising event, andyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days.
1. 14 days, or • The ªpurchaserº uses the unit.That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%
of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others
at a fair rental price. Examples
See What Is a Day of Personal Use, later. Use As Main Home Before or After The following examples show how to determine
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur- Renting days of personal use.
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,
do not count that day as a day of rental use in For purposes of determining whether a dwelling Example 1. You and your neighbor are
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of unit was used as a home, you may not have to co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last
personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above. count days you used the property as your main year, you rented the unit to vacationers when-
However, this rule does not apply when dividing home before or after renting it or offering it for ever possible. The unit was not used as a main
expenses between rental and personal use. rent as days of personal use. Do not count them home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit
as days of personal use if: for 2 weeks last year; you did not use it at all.
Fair rental price. A fair rental price for your Because your neighbor has an interest in the• You rented or tried to rent the property forproperty generally is the amount of rent that a unit, both of you are considered to have used the12 or more consecutive months.person who is not related to you would be willing unit for personal purposes during those 2
• You rented or tried to rent the property forto pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental weeks.
a period of less than 12 consecutiveprice if it is substantially less than the rents
months and the period ended becausecharged for other properties that are similar to Example 2. You and your neighbors are
your property in your area. you sold or exchanged the property. co-owners of a house under a shared equity
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the • The cottage was used for rental a total of a net loss, your deduction for certain rental ex-
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail- penses is limited.house and pay you a fair rental price.
able for rent but not rented (7 days) are To figure your deductible rental expensesEven though your neighbors have an interest not days of rental use. The July weekend and any carryover to next year, use Worksheetin the house, the days your neighbors live there (2 days) you used it is rental use because 9-1 at the end of this chapter.are not counted as days of personal use by you. you received a fair rental price for theThis is because your neighbors rent the house weekend.as their main home under a shared equity fi-
• You used the cottage for personal pur-nancing agreement.
poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in Depreciation
May).Example 3. You own a rental property that
You recover the cost of income-producing prop-you rent to your son. Your son does not own any • The total use of the cottage was 99 days erty through yearly tax deductions. You do thisinterest in this property. He uses it as his main (14 days personal use + 85 days rental by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-home and pays you a fair rental price. use). ing some of the cost on the tax return each year.Your son's use of the property is not personal • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of Three basic factors determine how much de-use by you because your son is using it as his the cottage expenses. preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) yourmain home, he owns no interest in the property, basis in the property, (2) the recovery period forand he is paying you a fair rental price. When determining whether you used the cot- the property, and (3) the depreciation method
tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgageExample 4. You rent your beach house to used it is personal use even though you re- or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun- ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There- fixtures and equipment, as an expense.tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price. fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83 You can deduct depreciation only on the part
days of rental use for this purpose. Because youYou are using your house for personal pur- of your property used for rental purposes. De-
used the cottage for personal purposes moreposes on the days that Joshua uses it because preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or
than 14 days and more than 10% of the days ofyour house is used by Joshua under an arrange- loss on a later sale or exchange. 
rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If youment that allows you to use his house. You may have to use Form 4562 to figurehave a net loss, you may not be able to deduct and report your depreciation. See How To Re-all of the rental expenses. See Property Used as port Rental Income and Expenses, later.a Home in the following discussion.Days Used for Repairs and
Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.Maintenance
You should claim the correct amount of depreci-How To Figure Rental
Any day that you spend working substantially full ation each tax year. Even if you did not claimIncome and Deductionstime repairing and maintaining (not improving) depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,
your property is not counted as a day of personal you must still reduce your basis in the propertyHow you figure your rental income and deduc-use. Do not count such a day as a day of per- by the full amount of depreciation that you couldtions depends on whether you used the dwellingsonal use even if family members use the prop- have deducted.unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used aserty for recreational purposes on the same day. If you deducted an incorrect amount of de-Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home, preciation for property in any year, you may behow many days the property was rented at a fair able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X,How To Divide Expenses rental price. Amended U.S Individual Income Tax Return. If
you are not allowed to make the correction on anIf you use a dwelling unit for both rental and
amended return, you can change your account-personal purposes, divide your expenses be- Property Not Used as a Home ing method to claim the correct amount of depre-tween the rental use and the personal use based
ciation. See Claiming the correct amount ofIf you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,on the number of days used for each purpose.
depreciation in chapter 2 of Publication 527 forreport all the rental income and deduct all theYou can deduct expenses for the rental use of more information.rental expenses. See How To Report Rentalthe unit under the rules explained in How To
Income and Expenses, later.Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later. Changing your accounting method to de-
 Your deductible rental expenses can be duct unclaimed depreciation. To change When dividing your expenses, follow these more than your gross rental income. However, your accounting method, you generally must filerules. see Limits on Rental Losses, later. Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-
• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair ing Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In
rental price is a day of rental use even if some instances, that consent is automatic. For
Property Used as a Homeyou used the unit for personal purposes more information, see chapter 1 of Publication
that day. This rule does not apply when 946.If you use a dwelling unit as a home during thedetermining whether you used the unit as year (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier), Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of landa home. how you figure your rental income and deduc- because land generally does not wear out, be-• Any day that the unit is available for rent tions depends on how many days the unit was come obsolete, or get used up. The costs ofbut not actually rented is not a day of rented at a fair rental price. clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping arerental use. usually all part of the cost of land and cannot beRented fewer than 15 days. If you use a
depreciated.dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
Example. Your beach cottage was avail- than 15 days during the year, do not include any
More information. See Publication 527 forable for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 rental income in your income. Also, you cannot
more information about depreciating rentaldays). Your family uses the cottage during the deduct any expenses as rental expenses.
property and see Publication 946 for more infor-last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unable Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell- mation about depreciation.to find a renter for the first week in August (7 ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or moredays). The person who rented the cottage for during the year, include all your rental income inJuly allowed you to use it over a weekend (2 Other Rules Aboutyour income. See How To Report Rental Incomedays) without any reduction in or refund of rent. and Expenses, later. If you had a net profit from Depreciable PropertyThe cottage was not used at all before May 17 or the rental property for the year (that is, if yourafter August 31. rental income is more than the total of your In addition to the rules about what methods you
You figure the part of the cottage expenses rental expenses, including depreciation), deduct can use, there are other rules you should be
to treat as rental expenses as follows. all of your rental expenses. However, if you had aware of with respect to depreciable property.
Page 70 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 73 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gain from disposition. If you dispose of Limits on passive activity deductions and Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more
depreciable property at a gain, you may have to credits.  Deductions for losses from passive ($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-
report, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain. activities are limited. You generally cannot offset rately), there is no special allowance.
See Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi- income, other than passive income, with losses
More information. See Publication 925 fortions of Assets. from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes
more information on the passive loss limits, in-on income, other than passive income, with
cluding information on the treatment of unusedAlternative minimum tax. If you use acceler- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
disallowed passive losses and credits and theated depreciation, you may have to file Form cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next
treatment of gains and losses realized on the6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter- tax year.
disposition of a passive activity.mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other For a detailed discussion of these rules, see
method that allows you to deduct more depreci- Publication 925.
ation than you could deduct using a straight line You may have to complete Form 8582 to
method. figure the amount of any passive activity loss for
How To Reportthe current tax year for all activities and the
amount of the passive activity loss allowed on
Rental Incomeyour tax return.
Limits on and ExpensesException for real estate professionals.
Rental activities in which you materially partici-Rental Losses
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, andpated during the year are not passive activities
provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,if, for that year, you were a real estate profes-Rental real estate activities are generally con-
you normally report your rental income and ex-sional. For a detailed discussion of the require-sidered passive activities, and the amount of
penses on Schedule E, Part I. However, do notments, see Publication 527. For a detailedloss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you
use that schedule to report a not-for-profit activ-discussion of material participation, see Publica-cannot deduct losses from rental real estate
ity. See Not Rented for Profit, earlier. tion 925.activities unless you have income from other
passive activities. However, you may be able to Providing substantial services. If you pro-deduct rental losses without regard to whether vide substantial services that are primarily foryou have income from other passive activities if Losses From Rental Real Estate your tenant's convenience, such as regularyou ªmateriallyº or ªactivelyº participated in your Activities cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, reportrental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. your rental income and expenses on ScheduleIf you or your spouse actively participated in aLosses from passive activities are first sub- C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business, orpassive rental real estate activity, you can de-ject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Soleduct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromamount of deductible losses from holding most Proprietorship). Use Form 1065, U.S. Return ofyour nonpassive income. This special allowancereal property placed in service after 1986. Partnership Income, if your rental activity is ais an exception to the general rule disallowing partnership (including a partnership with yourlosses in excess of income from passive activi-Exception. If your rental losses are less than spouse unless it is a qualified joint venture).ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the$25,000, and you actively participated in the Substantial services do not include the furnish-activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofrental activity, the passive activity limits probably ing of heat and light, cleaning of public areas,nonpassive income after taking into account anydo not apply to you. See Losses From Rental trash collection, etc. For information, see Publi-losses allowed under this exception.Real Estate Activities, later. cation 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. You
also may have to pay self-employment tax onProperty used as a home. If you used the Active participation. You actively partici- your rental income using Schedule SE (Formrental property as a home during the year, the pated in a rental real estate activity if you (and 1040), Self-Employment Tax.passive activity rules do not apply to that home. your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental
Instead, you must follow the rules explained property and you made management decisions Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement. Ifunder Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including or arranged for others to provide services (such you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest onVacation Home), earlier. as repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. your rental property to any one person, you
Management decisions include approving new should receive a Form 1098, or similar state-
tenants, deciding on rental terms, approving ex- ment showing the interest you paid for the year.At-Risk Rules
penditures, and similar decisions. If you and at least one other person (other than
 The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you your spouse if you file a joint return) were liable
Maximum special allowance. The maximumcan deduct as losses from activities often de- for, and paid interest on the mortgage, and the
special allowance is:scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real other person received the Form 1098, report
property (other than mineral property) placed in your share of the interest on Schedule E (Form• $25,000 for single individuals and marriedservice before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk 1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your returnindividuals filing a joint return for the taxrules. showing the name and address of the otheryear,Generally, any loss from an activity subject person. In the left margin of Schedule E, next to
• $12,500 for married individuals who fileto the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of line 13, enter ªSee attached.º
separate returns for the tax year and livedthe total amount you have at risk in the activity at
apart from their spouses at all times duringthe end of the tax year. You are considered at Schedule E (Form 1040)the tax year, andrisk in an activity to the extent of cash and the
adjusted basis of other property you contributed Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to report• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced byto the activity and certain amounts borrowed for your rental income and expenses. List your totalthe special allowance for which the surviv-use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more income, expenses, and depreciation for eaching spouse qualified.information. rental property. Be sure to answer the question
If your modified adjusted gross income on line 2.
(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if If you have more than three rental or royaltyPassive Activity Limits
married filing separately), you can deduct your properties, complete and attach as many
Generally, all rental real estate activities (except loss up to the amount specified above. If your Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.
those meeting the exception for real estate pro- MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
fessionals, below) are passive activities. For this $50,000 if married filing separately), your spe- ever, fill in the ªTotalsº column on only one
purpose, a rental activity is an activity from cial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference Schedule E. The figures in the ªTotalsº column
which you receive income mainly for the use of between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing sep- on that Schedule E should be the combined
tangible property, rather than for services. arately) and your MAGI. totals of all Schedules E.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Page 74 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A.
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B.
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C.
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D.
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ...................... . E.
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F.
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1.
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a.
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b.
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d.
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e.
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3.
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a.
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2009 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e.
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5.
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the depreciation for the rental portion of the dwelling unit .................... . b.
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2009 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e.
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a.
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b.
Page 72 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 75 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1 Instructions. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for
a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a ±2c, 4a±4b, and 6a±6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (as if you were itemizing your
deductions) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college
tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A, if you
had not rented the unit. See the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38)
without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct the part of the qualified mortgage
insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount from
Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If
any of the loss is due to a disaster which occurred before 2010 and which was declared a federal disaster after 2007, see the
Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 19, enter 10% of your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income
and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of the result from Form 4684, line 21, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion
on a separate Form 4684.
CAUTION
!
At the time this publication went to print, Congress was considering legislation that would extend the deduction for a
net disaster loss. To find out if this legislation was enacted, and for more details, see Publication 527 or go to 
www.irs.gov/formspubs.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used
for rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage
insurance premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (as
explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ............................... .
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...................................... .
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ........................... .
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet .... .
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish among
the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in- You must complete and attach Form 4562 for • Any other car expenses, including the
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations, rental activities only if you are claiming: standard mileage rate or lease expenses.
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest- • Depreciation, including the special depre- Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E, ciation allowance, on property placed in worksheet. You do not have to attach thesepage 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E you service during 2010, computations to your return, but you shouldused to enter the combined totals in Part I. Also, keep them in your records for future reference. • Depreciation on listed property (such as ainclude the amount from line 26 (Part I) in the
car), regardless of when it was placed inªTotal income or (loss)º on line 41 (Part V).
service, orOn Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the
depreciation you are claiming for each property.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

Page 76 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What is not covered in this chapter. The Roth rollovers, the taxable amount is included in
income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. Youfollowing topics are not discussed in this chap-
can choose to include the entire amount in in-ter.
10. come in 2010. You must report in-plan RothThe General Rule. This is the method gen- rollovers on Form 8606. See Publication 575 forerally used to determine the tax treatment of more information.pension and annuity income from nonqualified
plans (including commercial annuities). For a More than one program. If you receive bene-Retirement qualified plan, you generally cannot use the fits from more than one program under a single
General Rule unless your annuity starting date trust or plan of your employer, such as a pension
plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have tois before November 19, 1996. For more informa-Plans, Pensions, figure the taxable part of each pension or annu-tion about the General Rule, see Publication
ity contract separately. Your former employer or939, General Rule for Pensions and Annuities.
the plan administrator should be able to tell youand Annuities Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). if you have more than one pension or annuityInformation on the tax treatment of amounts you contract.receive from an IRA is in chapter 17.
Section 457 deferred compensation plans.Civil service retirement benefits. If youWhat's New for 2010 If you work for a state or local government or forare retired from the federal government (either a tax-exempt organization, you may be able toregular or disability retirement), see PublicationRollovers to Roth IRAs. If you roll over participate in a section 457 deferred compensa-721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirementamounts from a qualified retirement plan to a tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you areBenefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor- not taxed currently on pay that is deferred underRoth IRA in 2010, any taxable amounts that you mation that you need if you are the survivor or the plan or on any earnings from the plan'sare required to include in income are included in beneficiary of a federal employee or retiree who investment of the deferred pay. You are gener-equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. You can died. ally taxed on amounts deferred in an eligiblechoose to include the entire amount in income in
state or local government plan only when they2010. For more information, see 2010 rollovers Useful Items are distributed from the plan. You are taxed onto Roth IRAs later. amounts deferred in an eligible tax-exempt or-You may want to see:
ganization plan when they are distributed orIn-plan rollovers to designated Roth ac-
otherwise made available to you.Publicationcounts. After September 27, 2010, if you are a
This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-participant in a 401(k) or 403(b) plan, your plan ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it doesmay permit you to roll over amounts in those not cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor-❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Serviceplans to a designated Roth account within the mation on deferrals under section 457 plans,Retirement Benefitssame plan. The rollover of any untaxed money see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions andmust be included in income. For 2010 in-plan ployee Compensation in Publication 525, Tax-AnnuitiesRoth rollovers, the taxable amount is included in able and Nontaxable Income.
income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. You For general information on these deferredForm (and Instructions)can choose to include the entire amount in in- compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred
come in 2010. You must report in-plan Roth Compensation Plans in Publication 575.❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension
rollovers on Form 8606. See Publication 575 for or Annuity Payments Disability pensions. If you retired on disabil-more information. ❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions, ity, you generally must include in income any
Annuities, Retirement or disability pension you receive under a plan that
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, is paid for by your employer. You must report
Insurance Contracts, etc. your taxable disability payments as wages on
line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until youReminder ❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-
❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans ment age generally is the age at which you canDisaster-related tax relief. Special rules ap- (Including IRAs) and Other first receive a pension or annuity if you are notply to retirement funds received by qualified indi- Tax-Favored Accounts disabled.viduals who suffered an economic loss as a
result of: You may be entitled to a tax credit if
you were permanently and totally dis-• The storms that began on May 4, 2007, in abled when you retired. For informa-
TIPthe Kansas disaster area, or tion on the credit for the elderly or the disabled,General Information see chapter 33.• The severe storms in the Midwestern dis-
aster areas in 2008. Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
Designated Roth accounts. A designated mum retirement age, payments you receive areFor more information on these special rules, see Roth account is a separate account created taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theRelief for Kansas Disaster Area  and Relief for under a qualified Roth contribution program to payments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, orMidwestern Disaster Areas  in Publication 575, which participants may elect to have part or all of on Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b.Pension and Annuity Income. their elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) plan
Disability payments for injuries in-designated as Roth contributions. Elective de-
curred as a direct result of a terroristferrals that are designated as Roth contributions
attack directed against the United
TIPare included in your income. However, qualified
States (or its allies) are not included in income.distributions are not included in your income.Introduction For more information about payments to survi-See Publication 575 for more information. vors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920,This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis- In-plan rollovers to designated Roth ac- Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks.tributions you receive from: counts. After September 27, 2010, if you are a For more information on how to report disa-• An employee pension or annuity from a participant in a 401(k) or 403(b) plan, your plan bility pensions, including military and certainqualified plan, may permit you to roll over amounts in those government disability pensions, see chapter 5.plans to a designated Roth account within the• A disability retirement, and same plan. The rollover of any untaxed money Retired public safety officers. An eligible re-
• A purchased commercial annuity. must be included in income. For 2010 in-plan tired public safety officer can elect to exclude
Page 74 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 77 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from income distributions of up to $3,000 made able to deduct the interest on the loan in some wages subject to applicable withholding require-
directly from a government retirement plan to situations. For details, see Loans Treated as ments.
the provider of accident, health, or long-term Distributions in Publication 575. For information
Foreign employment contributions. If youdisability insurance. See Insurance Premiums on the deductibility of interest, see chapter 23.
worked in a foreign country and contributionsfor Retired Public Safety Officers  in Publication Tax-free exchange. No gain or loss is recog- were made to your retirement plan, special rules575 for more information. nized on an exchange of an annuity contract for apply in determining your cost. See Publication
another annuity contract if the insured or annui-Railroad retirement benefits. Part of any rail- 575.
tant remains the same. However, if an annuityroad retirement benefits you receive is treated
contract is exchanged for a life insurance orfor tax purposes like social security benefits, and
endowment contract, any gain due to interestpart is treated like an employee pension. For
accumulated on the contract is ordinary income.information about railroad retirement benefits Taxation of PeriodicSee Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica-treated as social security benefits, see Publica-
tion 575 for more information about exchangestion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail- Paymentsof annuity contracts.road Retirement Benefits. For information about
railroad retirement benefits treated as an em-
Fully taxable payments. Generally, if you didployee pension, see Railroad Retirement Bene- How To Report not pay any part of the cost of your employeefits in Publication 575.
pension or annuity and your employer did notIf you file Form 1040, report your total annuity onWithholding and estimated tax. The payer withhold part of the cost from your pay while youline 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If yourof your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an- worked, the amounts you receive each year arepension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on linenuity, or deferred compensation plan will with- fully taxable. You must report them on your16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts income tax return.If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-paid to you. You can tell the payer how much to
nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on linewithhold, or not to withhold, by filing Form W-4P. Partly taxable payments. If you paid part of12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,If you choose not to have tax withheld, or you do the cost of your pension or annuity, you are notenter it on line 12b, do not make an entry on linenot have enough tax withheld, you may have to taxed on the part of the pension or annuity you12a.pay estimated tax. receive that represents a return of your cost. The
If you receive an eligible rollover distribution, rest of the amount you receive is generally tax-More than one annuity. If you receive more
you cannot choose not to have tax withheld. able. You figure the tax-free part of the paymentthan one annuity and at least one of them is not
20% will generally be withheld, but no tax will be using either the Simplified Method or the Gen-fully taxable, enter the total amount received
withheld on a direct rollover of an eligible rollover eral Rule. Your annuity starting date andfrom all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or
distribution. See Direct rollover option  under whether or not your plan is qualified determineForm 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable part
Rollovers, later. which method you must or may use.on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line
For more information, see Pensions and An- If your annuity starting date is after Novem-12b. If all the annuities you receive are fully
nuities under Tax Withholding for 2011 in chap- ber 18, 1996, and your payments are from ataxable, enter the total of all of them on Form
ter 4. qualified plan, you must use the Simplified1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
Method. Generally, you must use the GeneralQualified plans for self-employed individu- Joint return. If you file a joint return and you Rule if your annuity is paid under a nonqualifiedals. Qualified plans set up by self-employed and your spouse each receive one or more pen- plan, and you cannot use this method if yourindividuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R. sions or annuities, report the total of the pen- annuity is paid under a qualified plan.10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by sole sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or If you had more than one partly taxable pen-proprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), and Form 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxable sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and thecorporations. They can cover self-employed part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line taxable part of each separately.persons, such as the sole proprietor or partners, 12b. If your annuity is paid under a qualified planas well as regular (common-law) employees. and your annuity starting date is after July 1,Distributions from a qualified plan are usually 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you couldfully taxable because most recipients have no have chosen to use either the General Rule orcost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in the Simplified Method.Cost (Investment in thethe plan, however, your pension or annuity pay-
ments from a qualified plan are taxed under the Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting dateContract)Simplified Method. For more information about determines the total amount of annuity pay-
qualified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement ments that you can exclude from your taxableBefore you can figure how much, if any, of aPlans for Small Business. income over the years. Once your annuity start-distribution from your pension or annuity plan is ing date is determined, it does not change. If youPurchased annuities. If you receive pension taxable, you must determine your cost (your calculate the taxable portion of your annuity pay-or annuity payments from a privately purchased investment in the contract) in the pension or ments using the simplified method worksheet,annuity contract from a commercial organiza- annuity. Your total cost in the plan includes the the annuity starting date determines the recov-tion, such as an insurance company, you gener- total premiums, contributions, or other amounts ery period for your cost. That recovery periodally must use the General Rule to figure the you paid. This includes the amounts your em- begins on your annuity starting date and is nottax-free part of each annuity payment. For more ployer contributed that were taxable to you when affected by the date you first complete the work-information about the General Rule, get Publica- paid. Cost does not include any amounts you sheet.tion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica- deducted or were excluded from your income.
tion 575 for the special provisions that apply to From this total cost, subtract any refunds of Exclusion limited to cost. If your annuity
these annuity contracts. premiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans starting date is after 1986, the total amount of
that were not included in your income, or other annuity income that you can exclude over theLoans. If you borrow money from your retire- tax-free amounts that you received by the later years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceedment plan, you must treat the loan as a nonperi- of the annuity starting date or the date on which your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (orodic distribution from the plan unless certain you received your first payment. the last annuitant's) death is allowed as a mis-exceptions apply. This treatment also applies to Your annuity starting date is the later of the cellaneous itemized deduction on the final returnany loan under a contract purchased under your first day of the first period for which you received of the decedent. This deduction is not subject toretirement plan, and to the value of any part of a payment, or the date the plan's obligations the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.your interest in the plan or contract that you became fixed.pledge or assign. This means that you must Exclusion not limited to cost. If your an-
include in income all or part of the amount bor- Designated Roth accounts. Your cost in nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-
rowed. Even if you do not have to treat the loan these accounts is your designated Roth contri- tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as long
as a nonperiodic distribution, you may not be butions that were included in your income as as you receive your annuity. If you chose a joint
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 75

Page 78 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and survivor annuity, your survivor can continue January 1, 2010. The benefits are to be paid for
to take the survivor's exclusion figured as of the the joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65. Taxation ofannuity starting date. The total exclusion may be Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plan
more than your cost. and had received no distributions before the Nonperiodic Payments
annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire-
ment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is toSimplified Method Nonperiodic distributions are also known as
receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon amounts not received as an annuity. They in-
Under the Simplified Method, you figure the Bill's death. clude all payments other than periodic payments
tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid- and corrective distributions. Examples ofBill must use the Simplified Method to figureing your cost by the total number of anticipated nonperiodic payments are cash withdrawals,his taxable annuity because his payments aremonthly payments. For an annuity that is pay- distributions of current earnings, certain loans,from a qualified plan and he is under age 75.able for the lives of the annuitants, this number and the value of annuity contracts transferredBecause his annuity is payable over the lives ofis based on the annuitants' ages on the annuity without full and adequate consideration.more than one annuitant, he uses his andstarting date and is determined from a table. For
Kathy's combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-any other annuity, this number is the number of Corrective distributions of excess plan con-monthly annuity payments under the contract. tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the tributions. Generally, if the contributionsworksheet. His completed worksheet is shownWho must use the Simplified Method. You made for you during the year to certain retire-in Worksheet 10-A.must use the Simplified Method if your annuity ment plans exceed certain limits, the excess is
Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100starting date is after November 18, 1996, and taxable to you. To correct an excess, your plan
you both: ($31,000 ÷  310) as shown on line 4 of the work- may distribute it to you (along with any income
sheet. Upon Bill's death, if Bill has not recovered earned on the excess). For information on plan1. Receive pension or annuity payments from contribution limits and how to report correctivethe full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also ex-a qualified employee plan, qualified em- distributions of excess contributions, see Retire-clude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.ployee annuity, or a tax-sheltered annuity ment Plan Contributions under Employee Com-The full amount of any annuity payments re-(403(b)) plan, and pensation in Publication 525.ceived after 310 payments are paid must be
2.  On your annuity starting date, you were included in gross income.
either under age 75, or entitled to less than Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodicIf Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments are5 years of guaranteed payments. payments. How you figure the taxablemade, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will amount of a nonperiodic distribution depends onbe allowed for the unrecovered cost on the finalGuaranteed payments. Your annuity contract whether it is made before the annuity startingincome tax return of the last to die. This deduc-provides guaranteed payments if a minimum date or on or after the annuity starting date. If it istion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-number of payments or a minimum amount (for made before the annuity starting date, its tax
gross-income limit.example, the amount of your investment) is pay- treatment also depends on whether it is made
able even if you and any survivor annuitant do under a qualified or nonqualified plan and, if it is
not live to receive the minimum. If the minimum made under a nonqualified plan, whether it fullyWho must use the General Rule. You mustamount is less than the total amount of the discharges the contract, is received under cer-use the General Rule if you receive pension orpayments you are to receive, barring death, dur- tain life insurance or endowment contracts, or isannuity payments from:ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig- allocable to an investment you made beforeured by ignoring any payment increases), you • A nonqualified plan (such as a private an- August 14, 1982.are entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or
payments. a nonqualified employee plan), or Annuity starting date. The annuity starting
date is either the first day of the first period for• A qualified plan if you are age 75 or olderHow to use the Simplified Method. Com-
which you receive an annuity payment under theplete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi- on your annuity starting date and your an-
contract or the date on which the obligationcation 575 to figure your taxable annuity for nuity payments are guaranteed for at least
under the contract becomes fixed, whichever is2010. 5 years.
later.Single-life annuity.  If your annuity is pay- Annuity starting before November 19,able for your life alone, use Table 1 at the bottom Distribution on or after annuity starting date.1996. If your annuity starting date is after Julyof the worksheet to determine the total number If you receive a nonperiodic payment from your1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, youof expected monthly payments. Enter on line 3 annuity contract on or after the annuity startinghad to use the General Rule for either circum-the number shown for your age at the annuity date, you generally must include all of the pay-stance just described. You also had to use it forstarting date. ment in gross income.any fixed-period annuity. If you did not have toMultiple-lives annuity. If your annuity is use the General Rule, you could have chosen topayable for the lives of more than one annuitant, Distribution before annuity starting date. Ifuse it. If your annuity starting date is before Julyuse Table 2 at the bottom of the worksheet to you receive a nonperiodic distribution before the2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule unlessdetermine the total number of expected monthly annuity starting date from a qualified retirementyou could use the Three-Year Rule.payments. Enter on line 3 the number shown for plan, you generally can allocate only part of it to
the combined ages of you and the youngest If you had to use the General Rule (or chose the cost of the contract. You exclude from your
survivor annuitant at the annuity starting date. to use it), you must continue to use it each year gross income the part that you allocate to theHowever, if your annuity starting date is that you recover your cost. cost. You include the remainder in your grossbefore January 1, 1998, do not use Table 2 and income.do not combine the annuitants' ages. Instead If you receive a nonperiodic distributionWho cannot use the General Rule. You can-you must use Table 1 and enter on line 3 the before the annuity starting date from a plan othernot use the General Rule if you receive yournumber shown for the primary annuitant's age than a qualified retirement plan, it is allocatedpension or annuity from a qualified plan andon the annuity starting date. first to earnings (the taxable part) and then to thenone of the circumstances described in the pre-Be sure to keep a copy of the com- cost of the contract (the tax-free part). This allo-ceding discussions apply to you. See Who mustpleted worksheet; it will help you figure cation rule applies, for example, to a commercialuse the Simplified Method, earlier.your taxable annuity next year. annuity contract you bought directly from the
RECORDS
issuer.
More information. For complete information For more information, see Figuring the Tax-Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-
on using the General Rule, including the actua- able Amount , under Taxation of Nonperiodicing retirement benefits in 2010, under a joint and
rial tables you need, see Publication 939. Payments, in Publication 575.survivor annuity. Bill's annuity starting date is
Page 76 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 79 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cannot use either of these optional treatmentsLump-Sum Distributions for any future distributions for the participant. Rollovers
A lump-sum distribution is the distribution or
Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.payment in 1 tax year of a plan participant's If you withdraw cash or other assets from a
The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is theentire balance from all of the employer's quali- qualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover
employer's contributions and income earned onfied plans of one kind (for example, pension, distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution
profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu- your account. You may recover your cost in the by rolling it over to another qualified retirement
tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privately plan or a traditional IRA.lump sum and any net unrealized appreciation
purchased commercial annuity or a section 457 For this purpose, the following plans are(NUA) in employer securities tax free.
deferred compensation plan of a state or local qualified retirement plans.Cost. In general, your cost is the total of:government or tax-exempt organization) cannot • A qualified employee plan.qualify as a lump-sum distribution. • The plan participant's nondeductible con-
• A qualified employee annuity.The participant's entire balance from a plan tributions to the plan,
does not include certain forfeited amounts. It • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan).• The plan participant's taxable costs of anyalso does not include any deductible voluntary life insurance contract distributed, • An eligible state or local government sec-employee contributions allowed by the plan after
tion 457 deferred compensation plan.1981 and before 1987. For more information • Any employer contributions that were tax-
about distributions that do not qualify as able to the plan participant, and
lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do Eligible rollover distributions. Generally, an• Repayments of any loans that were tax-not qualify  under Lump-Sum Distributions  in eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofable to the plan participant.Publication 575. all or any part of the balance to your credit in a
If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a You must reduce this cost by amounts previ- qualified retirement plan. For information about
qualified employee plan or qualified employee ously distributed tax free. exceptions to eligible rollover distributions, see
annuity and the plan participant was born before Publication 575.Net unrealized appreciation (NUA). TheJanuary 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op- NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Form Rollover of nontaxable amounts. You maytional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu- 1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu- be able to roll over the nontaxable part of ation. The part from active participation in the plan
tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex- distribution (such as your after-tax contributions)before 1974 may qualify as capital gain subject
change the securities. (For more information, made to another qualified retirement plan that isto a 20% tax rate. The part from participation
a qualified employee plan or a 403(b) plan, or tosee Distributions of employer securities underafter 1973 (and any part from participation
a traditional or Roth IRA. The transfer must beTaxation of Nonperiodic Payments  in Publica-before 1974 that you do not report as capital
made either through a direct rollover to a quali-tion 575.)gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use
fied plan or 403(b) plan that separately accountsthe 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figure
for the taxable and nontaxable parts of the rollo-tax on the ordinary income part.
ver or through a rollover to a traditional or RothCapital Gain TreatmentUse Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on IRA.a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth- Capital gain treatment applies only to the tax- If you roll over only part of a distribution thatods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added to includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,able part of a lump-sum distribution resultingthe regular tax figured on your other income. the amount you roll over is treated as comingfrom participation in the plan before 1974. TheThis may result in a smaller tax than you would first from the taxable part of the distribution.amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20%pay by including the taxable amount of the distri- Any after-tax contributions that you roll overrate. You can elect this treatment only once forbution as ordinary income in figuring your regu- into your traditional IRA, become part of yourany plan participant, and only if the plan partici-lar tax. basis (cost) in your IRAs. To recover your basispant was born before January 2, 1936.
when you take distributions from your IRA, youHow to treat the distribution. If you receive a Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose the must complete Form 8606 for the year of thelump-sum distribution, you may have the follow- 20% capital gain election. For more information, distribution. For more information, see the Forming options for how you treat the taxable part. see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum 8606 instructions.Distributions in Publication 575.• Report the part of the distribution from par-
Direct rollover option. You can choose toticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if
have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-you qualify) and the part from participation
bution paid directly to another qualified retire-10-Year Tax Optionafter 1973 as ordinary income.
ment plan that accepts rollover distributions or to• Report the part of the distribution from par- The 10-year tax option is a special formula used a traditional or Roth IRA. If you choose the directticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if to figure a separate tax on the ordinary income rollover option, or have an automatic rollover, noyou qualify) and use the 10-year tax option part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax tax will be withheld from any part of the distribu-to figure the tax on the part from partici- only once, for the year in which you receive the tion that is directly paid to the trustee of the otherpation after 1973 (if you qualify). plan.distribution, not over the next 10 years. You can
elect this treatment only once for any plan par-• Use the 10-year tax option to figure the tax Payment to you option. If an eligible rolloverticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornon the total taxable amount (if you qualify). distribution is paid to you, 20% generally will bebefore January 2, 1936. withheld for income tax. However, the full• Roll over all or part of the distribution. See
The ordinary income part of the distribution is amount is treated as distributed to you evenRollovers, later. No tax is currently due on
the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R though you actually receive only 80%. You gen-the part rolled over. Report any part not
given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if erally must include in income any part (includingrolled over as ordinary income. 
any, shown in box 3. You also can treat the the part withheld) that you do not rollover within• Report the entire taxable part of the distri- capital gain part of the distribution (box 3 of 60 days to another qualified retirement plan or tobution as ordinary income on your tax re- a traditional or Roth IRA. (See Pensions andForm 1099-R) as ordinary income for theturn. Annuities under Tax Withholding for 2011  in10-year tax option if you do not choose capital
chapter 4.)gain treatment for that part.The first three options are explained in the
Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose the If you decide to roll over an amountfollowing discussions.
10-year tax option. You must use the special equal to the distribution before with-
Tax Rate Schedule shown in the instructions forElecting optional lump-sum treatment. You holding, your contribution to the new
CAUTION
!
Part III to figure the tax. Publication 575 illus-can choose to use the 10-year tax option or plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-
trates how to complete Form 4972 to figure thecapital gain treatment only once after 1986 for ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-
separate tax.any plan participant. If you make this choice, you place the amount withheld.
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 77

Page 80 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Time for making rollover. You generally Worksheet 10-A. Simplified Methodmust complete the rollover of an eligible rollover Worksheet for Bill Smith Keep for Your Records
distribution paid to you by the 60th day following
the day on which you receive the distribution 1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.from your employer's plan. (If an amount distrib- Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Formuted to you becomes a frozen deposit in a finan- 1040A, line 12a ................................... . 1. 14,400cial institution during the 60-day period after you 2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at thereceive it, the rollover period is extended for the annuity starting date plus any death benefitperiod during which the distribution is in a frozen exclusion*. See Cost (Investment in thedeposit in a financial institution.) Contract) earlier ..................... . 2. 31,000The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement
Note: If your annuity starting date was beforewhere the failure to do so would be against
this year and you completed this worksheetequity or good conscience, such as in the event
last year, skip line 3 and enter the amount fromof a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond
line 4 of last year's worksheet on line 4 belowyour reasonable control.
(even if the amount of your pension or annuityThe administrator of a qualified plan must
has changed). Otherwise, go to line 3.give you a written explanation of your distribu-
3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1tion options within a reasonable period of time
below. But if your annuity starting date wasbefore making an eligible rollover distribution.
after 1997 and the payments are for your life
Qualified domestic relations order (QDRO). and that of your beneficiary, enter the
You may be able to roll over tax free all or part of appropriate number from Table 2 below .... . 3. 310
a distribution from a qualified retirement plan 4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ...... . 4. 100
that you receive under a QDRO. If you receive 5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months forthe distribution as an employee's spouse or for- which this year's payments were made. If yourmer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary), annuity starting date was before 1987, enterthe rollover rules apply to you as if you were the this amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7,employee. You can roll over the distribution from 10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6 ........ . 5. 1,200the plan into a traditional IRA or to another 6. Enter any amounts previously recovered taxeligible retirement plan. See Publication 575 for free in years after 1986. This is the amountmore information on benefits received under a shown on line 10 of your worksheet for lastQDRO. year ............................. . 6. -0-
7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 .............. . 7. 31,000Rollover by surviving spouse. You may be
8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ...................... . 8. 1,200able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-
tion from a qualified retirement plan you receive 9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the
as the surviving spouse of a deceased em- result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for
ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b .............. . 9. 13,200
were the employee. You can roll over a distribu- Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the
tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi- amount figured on this line instead. If you are a retired public safety
tional or Roth IRA. For a rollover to a Roth IRA, officer, see Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety Officers
see Rollovers to Roth IRAs, later. in Publication 575 before entering an amount on your tax return.
A distribution paid to a beneficiary other than 10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987?
the employee's surviving spouse is generally not M Yes. STOP. Do not complete the rest of this worksheet.
an eligible rollover distribution. However, see ú No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered tax
Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary, next. free through 2010. You will need this number if you need to fill out
this worksheet next year ............................. . 10. 1,200Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. If you
11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. Ifare a designated beneficiary (other than a sur-
zero, you will not have to complete this worksheet next year. Theviving spouse) of a deceased employee, you
payments you receive next year will generally be fully taxable ... . 11. 29,800may be able to roll over tax free all or a portion of
a distribution you receive from an eligible retire-
TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVEment plan of the employee. The distribution
AND your annuity starting date wasÐmust be a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer to
IF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18,your traditional or Roth IRA that was set up to
starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3...receive the distribution. The transfer will be
55 or under 300 360treated as an eligible rollover distribution and the
56±60 260 310receiving plan will be treated as an inherited
61±65 240 260IRA. For information on inherited IRAs, see Pub-
66±70 170 210lication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
71 or older 120 160ments (IRAs).
Retirement bonds. If you redeem retirement TABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVEbonds purchased under a qualified bond IF the combined agespurchase plan, you can roll over the proceeds at annuity starting THEN enterthat exceed your basis tax free into an IRA as date were... on line 3...
discussed in Publication 590 or qualified em- 110 or under 410ployer plan. 111±120 360
121±130 310Designated Roth accounts. You can roll
131±140 260over an eligible rollover distribution from a desig-
141 or older 210nated Roth account only into another desig-
nated Roth account or a Roth IRA. If you want to
* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees whoroll over the part of the distribution that is not
died before August 21, 1996.included in income, you must make a direct
rollover of the entire distribution or you can roll
over the entire amount (or any portion) to a Roth
Page 78 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 81 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRA. For more information on rollovers from des- you receive, as explained earlier, and begin additional tax is figured on Form 5329. For more
ignated Roth accounts, see Publication 575. drawing out the funds at a normal retirement information, see Form 5329 and its instructions.
age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex- For information on qualified distribution fromIn-plan rollovers to designated Roth ac- pectancy. These special additional taxes are the Roth IRAs, see Additional Tax on Early Distribu-counts. After September 27, 2010, if you are a taxes on: tions in chapter 2 of Publication 590.participant in a 401(k) or 403(b) plan, your plan
may permit you to roll over amounts in those • Early distributions, and
Distributions from in-plan rollovers to desig-plans to a designated Roth account within the • Excess accumulation (not receiving mini- nated Roth accounts within the 5-year pe-same plan. The rollover of any untaxed money mum distributions). riod. If, within the 5-year period starting withmust be included in income. For 2010 in-plan
the first day of your tax year in which you rolledThese taxes are discussed in the following sec-Roth rollovers, the taxable amount is included in
over an amount from 401(k) or 403(b) plan to ations.income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. You
designated Roth account, you take a distributioncan choose to include the entire amount in in- If you must pay either of these taxes, report from the designated Roth account, you maycome in 2010. You must report in-plan Roth them on Form 5329. However, you do not have have to pay the additional 10% tax on earlyrollovers on Form 8606. See Publication 575 for to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early distributions. You generally must pay the 10%more information. distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly additional tax on any amount attributable to theIf you are including the taxable amount in shows a ª1º in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the part of the in-plan rollover that you had to includeincome in 2011 and 2012 and take a distribution taxable part of the distribution on Form 1040, in income. The additional tax is figured on Formfrom the designated Roth account in 2010 that is line 58 and write ªNoº under the heading ªOther 5329. For more information, see Form 5329 andallocable to the in-plan rollover, you may be Taxesº to the left of line 58. its instructions. For information on qualified dis-required to include a portion of the taxable Even if you do not owe any of these taxes,amount in income in 2010. This amount is deter- tributions from designated Roth accounts, seeyou may have to complete Form 5329 and at-mined on Form 8606. See Form 8606 and its Designated Roth accounts  under Taxation oftach it to your Form 1040. This applies if youinstructions for more information. Periodic Payments in Publication 575.meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-
Rollovers to Roth IRAs. You can roll over tions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does not Exceptions to tax. Certain early distributionsdistributions directly from a qualified retirement indicate an exception. are excepted from the early distribution tax. Ifplan (other than a designated Roth account) to a the payer knows that an exception applies toRoth IRA . Tax on Early Distributions your early distribution, distribution code ª2,º ª3,ºYou must include in your gross income distri-
or ª4º should be shown in box 7 of your Formbutions from a qualified retirement plan (other Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi- 1099-R and you do not have to report the distri-than a designated Roth account) that you would odic) from qualified retirement plans and non- bution on Form 5329. If an exception applies buthave had to include in income if you had not qualified annuity contracts made to you before distribution code ª1º (early distribution, norolled them over into a Roth IRA. You do not you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional known exception) is shown in box 7, you mustinclude in gross income any part of a distribution tax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of thefrom a qualified retirement plan that is a return of distribution that you must include in gross in- distribution shown in box 2a of your Formcontributions to the plan that were taxable to you come. 1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterwhen paid. In addition, the 10% tax on early For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan the amount that can be excluded and the excep-distributions does not apply. is: tion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-
2010 rollovers to Roth IRAs. For rollovers tions.• A qualified employee plan,from qualified retirement plans to a Roth IRA in
If distribution code ª1º is incorrectly2010, any amounts that are required to be in- • A qualified employee annuity plan,
shown on your Form 1099-R for a dis-cluded in income are included in income in equal • A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or tribution received when you were ageamounts in 2011 and 2012. If you elect other-
TIP
591/2 or older, include that distribution on Formwise, you can choose to include the entire • An eligible state or local government sec-
5329. Enter exception number ª12º on line 2.amount in income in 2010. tion 457 deferred compensation plan (to
You may be required to include some, or all, the extent that any distribution is attributa- General exceptions. The tax does not ap-of a 2010 rollover from a qualified employer plan ble to amounts the plan received in a di- ply to distributions that are:to a Roth IRA in income in 2010 if you also take a rect transfer or rollover from one of the
Roth IRA distribution in 2010. See Form 8606 other plans listed here or an IRA). • Made as part of a series of substantially
and its instructions for more information. equal periodic payments (made at least
annually) for your life (or life expectancy)Form 8606. You must file Form 8606 with 5% rate on certain early distributions from or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)your tax return to report 2010 rollovers from deferred annuity contracts. If an early with-
of you and your designated beneficiary (ifqualified retirement plans (other than desig- drawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-
from a qualified retirement plan, the pay-nated Roth accounts) to Roth IRAs (unless you ject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate may
ments must begin after your separationrecharacterized the entire amount), and to figure apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions
from service),the amount to include in income. See the In- under a written election providing a specific
structions for Form 8606 for more information. schedule for the distribution of your interest in • Made because you are totally and perma-
the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you had nently disabled, orMore information. For more information on begun receiving payments under the election.the rules for rolling over distributions, see Publi- • Made on or after the death of the planOn line 4 of Form 5329, multiply the line 3cation 575. participant or contract holder.amount by 5% instead of 10%. Attach an expla-
nation to your return.
Additional exceptions for qualified retire-
ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-Distributions from rollovers to Roth IRAs
butions that are:from eligible retirement plans within theSpecial Additional
5-year period. If, within the 5-year period • From a qualified retirement plan (otherstarting with the first day of your tax year inTaxes than an IRA) after your separation fromwhich you rolled over an amount from an eligible service in or after the year you reachedTo discourage the use of pension funds for pur- retirement plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distri- age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safetyposes other than normal retirement, the law im- bution from the Roth IRA, you may have to pay employees),poses additional taxes on early distributions of the additional 10% tax on early distributions.
• From a qualified retirement plan (otherthose funds and on failures to withdraw the You generally must pay the 10% additional tax
than an IRA) to an alternate payee underfunds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to on any amount attributable to the part of the
a qualified domestic relations order,these taxes if you roll over all early distributions rollover that you had to include in income. The
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 79

Page 82 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• From a qualified retirement plan to the ex- 701/2 on December 30, 2010. If your 70th birth-Tax on Excess day was on July 1, 2010, you reached age 701/2tent you have deductible medical ex-
Accumulation on January 1, 2011.penses (medical expenses that exceed
7.5% of your adjusted gross income), Required distributions. By the required be-To make sure that most of your retirement bene-whether or not you itemize your deduc- ginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei-fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rathertions for the year, ther:than to your beneficiaries after your death, the
payments that you receive from qualified retire-• From an employer plan under a written • Receive your entire interest in the plan (for
ment plans must begin no later than your re- a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefitelection that provides a specific schedule
quired beginning date (defined later). The accruing after 1986), orfor distribution of your entire interest if, as
payments each year cannot be less than theof March 1, 1986, you had separated from • Begin receiving periodic distributions inrequired minimum distribution.service and had begun receiving pay- annual amounts calculated to distribute
ments under the election, your entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an-Required distributions not made. If the
nuity, your entire benefit accruing afteractual distributions to you in any year are less• From an employee stock ownership plan 1986) over your life or life expectancy orthan the minimum required distribution for thatfor dividends on employer securities held over the joint lives or joint life expectan-year, you are subject to an additional tax. Theby the plan, cies of you and a designated beneficiarytax equals 50% of the part of the required mini-
(or over a shorter period).mum distribution that was not distributed.• From a qualified retirement plan due to an
IRS levy of the plan, or For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan Additional information. For more informa-includes:• From elective deferral accounts under tion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula-
• A qualified employee plan,401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange- tion in Publication 575.
ments that are qualified reservist distribu- • A qualified employee annuity plan, Form 5329. You must file Form 5329 if youtions. owe tax because you did not receive a minimum• An eligible section 457 deferred compen- required distribution from your qualified retire-sation plan, orQualified public safety employees. If you ment plan.
are a qualified public safety employee, distribu- • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits
tions made from a governmental defined benefit accruing after 1986).
pension plan are not subject to the additional tax
on early distributions. You are a qualified public SurvivorsWaiver. The tax may be waived if you estab-
safety employee if you provide police protection, lish that the shortfall in distributions was due to
firefighting services, or emergency medical Generally, a survivor or beneficiary reports pen-reasonable error and that reasonable steps are
services for a state or municipality, and you sion or annuity income in the same way the planbeing taken to remedy the shortfall. See the
participant would have. However, some specialseparated from service in or after the year you instructions for Form 5329 for the procedure to
rules apply.attained age 50. follow if you believe you qualify for a waiver of
this tax. Survivors of employees. If you are entitled toQualified reservist distributions. A quali-
receive a survivor annuity on the death of anfied reservist distribution is not subject to the State insurer delinquency proceedings.
employee, who died before becoming entitled toYou might not receive the minimum distributionadditional tax on early distributions. A qualified
any annuity payments, you can exclude part ofbecause assets are invested in a contract is-reservist distribution is a distribution (a) from each annuity payment as a tax-free recovery ofsued by an insurance company in state insurerelective deferrals under a section 401(k) or the employee's investment in the contract. Youdelinquency proceedings. If your payments are403(b) plan, or a similar arrangement, (b) to an must figure the taxable and tax-free parts of yourreduced below the minimum due to these pro-individual ordered or called to active duty (be- annuity payments using the method that appliesceedings, you should contact your plan adminis-cause he or she is a member of a reserve com- as if you were the employee.trator. Under certain conditions, you will notponent) for a period of more than 179 days or for have to pay the 50% excise tax. Survivors of retirees. If you receive benefitsan indefinite period, and (c) made during the as a survivor under a joint and survivor annuity,period beginning on the date of the order or call Required beginning date. Unless the rule for include those benefits in income in the sameand ending at the close of the active duty period. 5% owners applies, you generally must begin to way the retiree would have included them inYou must have been ordered or called to active receive distributions from your qualified retire- income. If you receive a survivor annuity be-
duty after September 11, 2001. For more infor- ment plan by April 1 of the year that follows the cause of the death of a retiree who had reported
mation, see Publication 575. later of: the annuity under the Three-Year Rule and re-
covered all of the cost tax free, your survivorAdditional exceptions for nonqualified an- • The calendar year in which you reach age payments are fully taxable.nuity contracts. The tax does not apply to 701/2, or If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-distributions from: • The calendar year in which you retire from ments under the General Rule, you must apply
the same exclusion percentage to your initial• A deferred annuity contract to the extent employment with the employer maintain-
survivor annuity payment called for in the con-ing the plan.allocable to investment in the contract
tract. The resulting tax-free amount will thenbefore August 14, 1982, However, your plan may require you to begin to remain fixed. Any increases in the survivor an-receive distributions by April 1 of the year that• A deferred annuity contract under a quali- nuity are fully taxable.follows the year in which you reach age 70 1/2,fied personal injury settlement, If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-even if you have not retired. ments under the Simplified Method, the part of• A deferred annuity contract purchased by
each payment that is tax free is the same as the5% owners. If you are a 5% owner, youyour employer upon termination of a quali- tax-free amount figured by the retiree at themust begin to receive distributions by April 1 offied employee plan or qualified employee annuity starting date. This amount remains fixedthe year that follows the calendar year in whichannuity plan and held by your employer even if the annuity payments are increased oryou reach age 701/2.until your separation from service, or decreased. See Simplified Method, earlier.
In any case, if the annuity starting date is• An immediate annuity contract (a single Age 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that
after 1986, the total exclusion over the yearspremium contract providing substantially is 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th
cannot be more than the cost.birthday.equal annuity payments that start within
one year from the date of purchase and For example, if you are retired and your 70th Estate tax deduction. If your annuity was a
birthday was on June 30, 2010, you were ageare paid at least annually). joint and survivor annuity that was included in
Page 80 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 83 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the decedent's estate, an estate tax may have If you received these benefits during 2010, • Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,
been paid on it. You can deduct the part of the you should have received a Form SSA-1099, • Employer-provided adoption benefits,total estate tax that was based on the annuity. Social Security Benefit Statement, or Form
• Foreign earned income or foreign housing,The deceased annuitant must have died after RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-
orthe annuity starting date. (For details, see sec- ment Board (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security
tion 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) Deduct it in Benefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S, State- • Income earned by bona fide residents ofequal amounts over your remaining life expec- ment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay- American Samoa or Puerto Rico.tancy. ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you
are a nonresident alien). These forms show theIf the decedent died before the annuity start-
Children's benefits. The rules in this chapteramounts received and repaid, and taxes with-ing date of a deferred annuity contract and you
apply to benefits received by children. See Whoheld for the year. You may receive more thanreceive a death benefit under that contract, the
is taxed, later.one of these forms for the same year. Youamount you receive (either in a lump sum or as
should add the amounts shown on all forms youperiodic payments) in excess of the decedent's
Figuring total income. To figure the total ofreceive for the year to determine the totalcost is included in your gross income as income
one-half of your benefits plus your other income,amounts received and repaid, and taxes with-in respect of a decedent for which you may be
use Worksheet 11-1 later in this discussion. Ifheld for that year. See the Appendix at the endable to claim an estate tax deduction.
the total is more than your base amount, part ofof Publication 915 for more information.You can take the estate tax deduction as an
your benefits may be taxable.itemized deduction on Schedule A, Form 1040.
Note. When the term ªbenefitsº is used in If you are married and file a joint return forThis deduction is not subject to the
this chapter, it applies to both social security 2010, you and your spouse must combine your2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on miscella-
benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad incomes and your benefits to figure whether anyneous deductions. See Publication 559, Survi-
retirement benefits. of your combined benefits are taxable. Even ifvors, Executors, and Administrators, for more
your spouse did not receive any benefits, youinformation on the estate tax deduction. What is not covered in this chapter. This must add your spouse's income to yours to fig-chapter does not cover the tax rules for the ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.following railroad retirement benefits.
If the only income you received during• Non-social security equivalent benefit 2010 was your social security or the(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
ment benefits, your benefits generally are not• Tier 2 benefits.11. taxable and you probably do not have to file a• Vested dual benefits. return. If you have income in addition to your
benefits, you may have to file a return even if• Supplemental annuity benefits.
none of your benefits are taxable.Social Security For information on these benefits, see Publica-
tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income. Base amount. Your base amount is:
This chapter also does not cover the tax rulesand Equivalent • $25,000 if you are single, head of house-for foreign social security benefits. These bene- hold, or qualifying widow(er),fits are taxable as annuities, unless they are
Railroad exempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social • $25,000 if you are married filing separately
security benefit under a tax treaty. and lived apart from your spouse for all of
2010,Retirement
Useful Items • $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, or
You may want to see:
Benefits • $-0- if you are married filing separately
and lived with your spouse at any timePublication
during 2010.
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
Introduction ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements Worksheet 11-1.  You can use Worksheet
(IRAs)This chapter explains the federal income tax 11-1 to figure the amount of income to compare
rules for social security benefits and equivalent with your base amount. This is a quick way to❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalenttier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the check whether some of your benefits may beRailroad Retirement Benefitsfollowing topics. taxable.
Forms (and Instructions)• How to figure whether your benefits are
Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if Yourtaxable. ❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals Benefits May be Taxable
• How to use the social security benefits ❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Requestworksheet (with examples). A. Enter the amount from box 5 of all
your Forms SSA-1099 and• How to report your taxable benefits. RRB-1099. Include the full amount
of any lump-sum benefit payments• How to treat repayments that are more
received in 2010, for 2010 andthan the benefits you received during the Are Any of Your earlier years. (If you received moreyear. than one form, combine the
Benefits Taxable? amounts from box 5 and enter theSocial security benefits include monthly retire- total.) ................. . A.
ment, survivor, and disability benefits. They do Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stopTo find out whether any of your benefits may benot include supplemental security income (SSI) here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.taxable, compare the base amount for your filingpayments, which are not taxable. status with the total of: B. Enter one-half of the amount onEquivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits line A .................. . B.are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad 1. One-half of your benefits, plus
C. Enter your taxable pensions,employee or beneficiary would have been enti- 2. All your other income, including wages, interest, dividends, andtled to receive under the social security system. tax-exempt interest. other taxable income ........ . C.They are commonly called the social security
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- When making this comparison, do not re-
fits. duce your other income by any exclusions for:
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 81

Page 84 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a and
Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if Your Filled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check the taxable part on line 14b. If you are married
Benefits May be Taxable if Your Benefits May be Taxable filing separately and you lived apart from your
D. Enter any tax-exempt interest E. Add lines B, C, and D ...... . E. $28,000 spouse for all of 2010, also enter ªDº to the right
income (such as interest on Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base of the word ªbenefitsº on line 14a.
municipal bonds) plus any amount for your filing status. If the amount on line
exclusions from income (listed E equals or is less than the base amount for your Benefits not taxable. If you are filing Form
earlier) ................. . D. filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this 1040EZ, do not report any benefits on your taxyear. If the amount on line E is more than your return. If you are filing Form 1040 or FormE. Add lines B, C, and D ....... . E. base amount, some of your benefits may beNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base 1040A, report your net benefits (the amount intaxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1amount for your filing status. If the amount on line box 5 of your Form SSA-1099 or Formin Publication 915 (or the Social Security BenefitsE equals or is less than the base amount for your RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a, or FormWorksheet in your tax form instructions). If none offiling status, none of your benefits are taxable this 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 1040, lineyour benefits are taxable, but you otherwise mustyear. If the amount on line E is more than your file a tax return, see Benefits not taxable, later, 20b, or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are marriedbase amount, some of your benefits may be under How To Report Your Benefits. filing separately and you lived apart from yourtaxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 in
spouse for all of 2010, also enter ªDº to the rightPublication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits
of the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, orWorksheet in your tax form instructions). If none of Who is taxed. Benefits are included in theyour benefits are taxable, but you otherwise must Form 1040A, line 14a.taxable income (to the extent they are taxable)file a tax return, see Benefits not taxable, later, of the person who has the legal right to receiveunder How To Report Your Benefits.
the benefits. For example, if you and your child How Much Is Taxable?
receive benefits, but the check for your child is
If part of your benefits are taxable, how much ismade out in your name, you must use only yourExample. You and your spouse (both over taxable depends on the total amount of yourpart of the benefits to see whether any benefits65) are filing a joint return for 2010 and you both benefits and other income. Generally, the higherare taxable to you. One-half of the part thatreceived social security benefits during the year. that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofbelongs to your child must be added to yourIn January 2011, you received a Form your benefits.child's other income to see whether any of thoseSSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in box benefits are taxable to your child.5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099 Maximum taxable part. Generally, up to 50%showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. You Repayment of benefits. Any repayment of of your benefits will be taxable. However, up toalso received a taxable pension of $22,000 and benefits you made during 2010 must be sub- 85% of your benefits can be taxable if either ofinterest income of $500. You did not have any tracted from the gross benefits you received in the following situations applies to you.tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are 2010. It does not matter whether the repayment
not taxable for 2010 because your income, as • The total of one-half of your benefits andwas for a benefit you received in 2010 or in an
figured in Worksheet 11-1 on this page, is not all your other income is more thanearlier year. If you repaid more than the gross
more than your base amount ($32,000) for mar- $34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filingbenefits you received in 2010, see Repayments
ried filing jointly. jointly).More Than Gross Benefits, later.
Even though none of your benefits are tax- Your gross benefits are shown in box 3 of • You are married filing separately and livedable, you must file a return for 2010 because Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay- with your spouse at any time during 2010.your taxable gross income ($22,500) exceeds ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5
the minimum filing requirement amount for your shows your net benefits for 2010 (box 3 minus
Which worksheet to use. A worksheet youfiling status. box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure
can use to figure your taxable benefits is in thewhether any of your benefits are taxable.
instructions for your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Filled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check Tax withholding and estimated tax. You can You can use either that worksheet or Worksheetif Your Benefits May be Taxable choose to have federal income tax withheld from 1 in Publication 915, unless any of the following
your social security benefits and/or the SSEB situations applies to you.A. Enter the amount from box 5 of portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits.all your Forms SSA-1099 and If you choose to do this, you must complete a 1. You contributed to a traditional individualRRB-1099. Include the full Form W-4V. retirement arrangement (IRA) and you oramount of any lump-sum benefit If you do not choose to have income tax your spouse is covered by a retirementpayments received in 2010, for
withheld, you may have to request additional plan at work. In this situation, you must2010 and earlier years. (If you
withholding from other income or pay estimated use the special worksheets in Appendix Breceived more than one form,
combine the amounts from box 5 tax during the year. For details, see Publication of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA
and enter the total.) ....... . A. $ 11,000 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the deduction and your taxable benefits.
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop instructions for Form 1040-ES. 2. Situation (1) does not apply and you takehere; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.B. Enter one-half of the amount on savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoptionline A ................ . B. 5,500 benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earned
How To ReportC. Enter your taxable pensions, income or housing (Form 2555 or Form
wages, interest, dividends, and 2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-
other taxable income ...... . C.  22,500 Your Benefits can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico by
bona fide residents. In this situation, youD. Enter any tax-exempt interest
If part of your benefits are taxable, you must useincome (such as interest on must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot usemunicipal bonds) plus any to figure your taxable benefits.
exclusions from income (listed Form 1040EZ. 3. You received a lump-sum payment for anearlier) ............... . D. -0-
Reporting on Form 1040. Report your net earlier year. In this situation, also complete
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-
SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a and lication 915. See Lump-sum election next.
the taxable part on line 20b. If you are married
filing separately and you lived apart from your Lump-sum election. You must include thespouse for all of 2010, also enter ªDº to the right taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-of the word ªbenefitsº on line 20a. ment of benefits received in 2010 in your 2010
income, even if the payment includes benefitsReporting on Form 1040A. Report your net
for an earlier year.benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form
Page 82 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 85 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........ . 31,980 Worksheet 1.This type of lump-sum benefit payment
7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from Figuring Your Taxable Benefitsshould not be confused with the
Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and anylump-sum death benefit that both the
TIP write-in adjustments you entered on the 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALLSSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries. dotted line next to line 36. your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.
No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subject Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line
to tax. from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 .... . -0- 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,600
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,800Generally, you use your 2010 income to fig- amount on line 6? 3. Combine the amounts from:ure the taxable part of the total benefits received Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 throughin 2010. However, you may be able to figure the No.
STOP None of your social security benefits are 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21.taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Formtaxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear- Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,1040A, line 14b.lier year separately, using your income for the 12b, and 13 ................ . 29,750Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,980earlier year. You can elect this method if it low- 4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form9. If you are: 1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0-ers your taxable benefits.
• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
Making the election. If you received a • Single, head of household, qualifying adjustments for:
widow(er), or married filing separatelylump-sum benefit payment in 2010 that includes • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, lineand you lived apart from your spousebenefits for one or more earlier years, follow the 26),for all of 2010, enter $25,000 .... . 25,000instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Sum • Foreign earned income or housingNote. If you are married filing separately (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, orElection to see whether making the election will and you lived with your spouse at any time Form 2555-EZ, line 18), andlower your taxable benefits. That discussion in 2010, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply • Certain income of bona fidealso explains how to make the election. line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on residents of Americanline 17. Then go to line 18. Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)Because the earlier year's taxable ben- 10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the or Puerto Rico ............ . -0-efits are included in your 2010 income, amount on line 8? 6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........ . 32,550no adjustment is made to the earlier
CAUTION
! 7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount fromNo.
STOP None of your benefits areyear's return. Do not file an amended return for Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and anytaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,the earlier year. write-in adjustments you entered on theor on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are dotted line next to line 36.married filing separately and you lived Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount fromapart from your spouse for all of 2010, be Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ....... . 1,000sure you entered ªDº to the right of the
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than theword ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or
amount on line 6?on Form 1040A, line 14a.Examples
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... . 6,980 No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;The following are a few examples you can use -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line$9,000 if single, head of household, 14b.as a guide to figure the taxable part of your qualifying widow(er), or married filing Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,550benefits. separately and you lived apart from your 9. If you are:spouse for all of 2010 ............ . 9,000
• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000Example 1. George White is single and files 12.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or
• Single, head of household, qualifyingless, enter -0- ................. . -0-Form 1040 for 2010. He received the following
widow(er), or married filing separately13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. . 6,980income in 2010: and you lived apart from your spouse14.Enter one-half of line 13 .......... . 3,490
for all of 2010, enter $25,000 .... . 32,00015.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... . 2,990Fully taxable pension ............ . $18,600 Note. If you are married filing separately16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 isWages from part-time job ......... .  9,400 and you lived with your spouse at any timezero, enter -0- ................. . -0-Taxable interest income .......... . 990 in 2010, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply17.Add lines 15 and 16 ............. . 2,990Total ...................... . $28,990 line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ . 5,083 line 17. Then go to line 18.19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller ofGeorge also received social security benefits 10. Is the amount on line 9 less than theline 17 or line 18. Also enter this amountduring 2010. The Form SSA-1099 he received in amount on line 8?on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A,January 2011 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figure line 14b .................... . $2,990 No.
STOP None of your benefits arehis taxable benefits, George completes the taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,worksheet shown here. or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you areThe amount on line 19 of George's worksheet married filing separately and you livedWorksheet 1. shows that $2,990 of his social security benefits apart from your spouse for all of 2010, be
 Figuring Your Taxable Benefits is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, George sure you entered ªDº to the right of the
word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, orenters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, he1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL on Form 1040A, line 14a.enters his taxable benefits of $2,990.your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... .
Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,980 $9,000 if single, head of household,
joint return on Form 1040A for 2010. Ray is2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,990 qualifying widow(er), or married filing
3. Combine the amounts from: retired and received a fully taxable pension of separately and you lived apart from your
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through spouse for all of 2010 ............ .$15,500. He also received social security bene-
14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. 12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero orfits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2010 shows net
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b, less, enter -0- ................. .benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during12b, and 13 ................. . 28,990 13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. .the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 14. Enter one-half of line 13 .......... .deductible payment to her IRA account of1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0- 15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... .$1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac-5. Enter the total of any exclusions/ 16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is
adjustments for: counts with a total of $250 in taxable interest zero, enter -0- ................ .
income. They complete Worksheet 1 and find• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............. .
26), that none of Ray's social security benefits are 18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ .
• Foreign earned income or housing 19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of linetaxable. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount on$29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250). On FormForm 2555-EZ, line 18), and Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line1040A, they enter $5,600 on line 14a and -0- on• Certain income of bona fide 14b ....................... .line 14b.residents of American 
Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) 
or Puerto Rico ............ . -0- Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file a
joint return on Form 1040 for 2010. Joe is a
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 83

Page 86 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9.  If you are:retired railroad worker and in 2010 received the Legal expenses for collecting the taxable
social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
• Single, head of household, qualifyingof tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe's Form laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A
widow(er), or married filingRRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is a (Form 1040), line 23.
separately and you lived apart fromretired government worker and receives a fully your spouse for all of 2010, entertaxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in $25,000 ................ . 32,000 Repayments More Thantaxable interest income plus interest of $200 on Note. If you are married filing separately
Gross Benefitsa qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings bond and you lived with your spouse at any
time in 2010, skip lines 9 through 16;interest qualified for the exclusion. They figure
multiply line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 ortheir taxable benefits by completing Worksheet
result on line 17. Then go to line 18. Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits1. Because they have qualified U.S. savings 10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the you repaid (box 4) are more than the grossbond interest, they follow the note at the begin- amount on line 8? benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,ning of the worksheet and use the amount from
your net benefits in box 5 will be a negativeline 2 of their Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) No.
STOP None of your benefits are
figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of yourtaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, lineon line 3 of the worksheet instead of the amount
20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you benefits will be taxable. Do not use a worksheetfrom line 8a of their Form 1040. On line 3 of the are married filing separately and you in this case. If you receive more than one form, aworksheet, they enter $40,500 ($38,000 + lived apart from your spouse for all of negative figure in box 5 of one form is used to$2,500). 2010, be sure you entered ªDº to the right offset a positive figure in box 5 of another formof the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line
Worksheet 1. for that same year.20a, or on Form 1040A, line 14a.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits If you have any questions about this negativeYes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... . 13,500
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; figure, contact your local SSA office or your localBefore you begin: $9,000 if single, head of household, RRB field office.• If you are married filing separately and you lived qualifying widow(er), or married filing
apart from your spouse for all of 2010, enter ªDº to separately and you lived apart from your Joint return. If you and your spouse file a jointthe right of the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line spouse for all of 2010 ........... . 12,000 return, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-109920a, or Form 1040A, line 14a. 12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse's• Do not use this worksheet if you repaid benefits in less, enter -0- ................ . 1,500
does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of your2010 and your total repayments (box 4 of Forms 13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 . . 12,000
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) were more than your form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's14. Enter one-half of line 13 ......... . 6,000gross benefits for 2010 (box 3 of Forms SSA-1099 form. You do this to get your net benefits when15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. . 5,000and RRB-1099). None of your benefits are taxable 16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.for 2010. For more information, see Repayments zero, enter -0- ............... . 1,275More Than Gross Benefits. 17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............ . 6,275 Example. John and Mary file a joint return• If you are filing Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest 18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ....... . 8,500 for 2010. John received Form SSA-1099 show-From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued 19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller ofAfter 1989, do not include the amount from line 8a ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Formline 17 or line 18. Also enter this amountof Form 1040 or Form 1040A on line 3 of this SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A,worksheet. Instead, include the amount from John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minusline 14b ................... . $6,275Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 2.
$500) as the amount of their net benefits when
figuring if any of their combined benefits are1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL More than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax- taxable.your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.
able because the income on line 8 of the work-Also enter this amount on Form 1040,
line 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ... . $10,000 Repayment of benefits received in an earliersheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and
2. Enter one-half of line 1 .......... . 5,000 year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of allBetty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, and
3. Combine the amounts from: of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a$6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b.
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc-through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, tion for the part of this negative figure that repre-and 21. sents benefits you included in gross income inForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,
an earlier year.12b, and 13 ............... . 40,500 Deductions Related to4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form Deduction $3,000 or less. If this deduction1040 or 1040A, line 8b ......... . -0- is $3,000 or less, it is subject to theYour Benefits5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesadjustments for:
to certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line
Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.related to the benefits you receive.26),
• Foreign earned income or housing Deduction more than $3,000. If this deduc-(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or Disability payments. You may have received tion is more than $3,000, you should figure yourForm 2555-EZ, line 18), and disability payments from your employer or an tax two ways:• Certain income of bona fide insurance company that you included as incomeresidents of American on your tax return in an earlier year. If you 1. Figure your tax for 2010 with the itemizedSamoa (Form 4563, line 15)
received a lump-sum payment from SSA oror Puerto Rico ........... . -0- deduction included on Schedule A, line 28.
RRB, and you had to repay the employer or6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ....... . 45,500
2. Figure your tax for 2010 in the followinginsurance company for the disability payments,7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from
steps.Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any you can take an itemized deduction for the part
write-in adjustments you entered on the of the payments you included in gross income in a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-dotted line next to line 36. the earlier year. If the amount you repay is more duction included on Schedule A, lineForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxfrom Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ... . -0- 28.credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the
b. For each year after 1983 for which partthe same way explained under Repaymentsamount on line 6?
of the negative figure represents a re-More Than Gross Benefits, later.No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter payment of benefits, refigure your tax--0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le- able benefits as if your total benefits for14b.
gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or the year were reduced by that part ofYes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 .... . 45,500
collect taxable income or in connection with the the negative figure. Then refigure the
determination, collection, or refund of any tax. tax for that year.
Page 84 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 87 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similarUseful Items
statement from the barter exchange should beamounts in (b) from the total of your You may want to see:
sent to you by February 15, 2011. It should showactual tax amounts.
the value of cash, property, services, credits, orPublicationd. Subtract the result in (c) from the result scrip you received from exchanges during 2010.
in (a). ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofCompare the tax figured in methods (1) and
Assets(2). Your tax for 2010 is the smaller of the two
amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, take ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses, Canceled Debtsthe itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form Including Capital Gains and Losses
1040), line 28. If method (2) results in less tax, Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or❏ 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures,claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c) forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youRepossessions, andabove on Form 1040, line 71, and enter ªI.R.C. must include the canceled amount in your in-Abandonments
1341º in the margin to the left of line 71. If both come. You have no income from the canceled
methods produce the same tax, deduct the re- debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. includes any indebtedness for which you are
liable or which attaches to property you hold.
Bartering If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a
Bartering is an exchange of property or services. business debt, report the amount on Schedule C
You must include in your income, at the time (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or
received, the fair market value of property or on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
services you receive in bartering. If you ex- Farming, if the debt is farm debt and you are a12. change services with another person and you farmer).
both have agreed ahead of time on the value of You may be able to elect to recognize a
the services, that value will be accepted as fair canceled business debt in income over a
market value unless the value can be shown to 5-tax-year period if the income is realized in aOther Income be otherwise. reacquisition in 2009 or 2010. For information on
Generally, you report this income on Sched- this election, see Revenue Procedure 2009-37
ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-36_IRB/ar07.
ness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit html.
Introduction From Business. However, if the barter involves
Form 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentan exchange of something other than services,You must include on your return all items of agency, financial institution, or credit unionsuch as in Example 3 below, you may have toincome you receive in the form of money, prop- cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 oruse another form or schedule instead.erty, and services unless the tax law states that more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-
you do not include them. Some items, however, tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-
are only partly excluded from income. This shown in box 2.ney who performs legal services for a client, a
chapter discusses many kinds of income and small corporation. The corporation gives you Interest included in canceled debt. If anyexplains whether they are taxable or nontax- shares of its stock as payment for your services. interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofable. You must include the fair market value of the canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestshares in your income on Schedule C (Form also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you• Income that is taxable must be reported 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year must include the interest portion of the canceledon your tax return and is subject to tax. you receive them. debt in your income depends on whether the• Income that is nontaxable may have to be interest would be deductible if you paid it. SeeExample 2. You are self-employed and ashown on your tax return but is not tax- Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.member of a barter club. The club uses ªcreditable. If the interest would not be deductible (suchunitsº as a means of exchange. It adds credit as interest on a personal loan), include in yourunits to your account for goods or services youThis chapter begins with discussions of the income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Ifprovide to members, which you can use tofollowing income items. the interest would be deductible (such as on apurchase goods or services offered by other business loan), include in your income the net• Bartering. members of the barter club. The club subtracts amount of the canceled debt (the amount showncredit units from your account when you receive• Canceled debts. in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxgoods or services from other members. You 3).• Sales parties at which you are the host or must include in your income the value of the
hostess. credit units that are added to your account, even Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial
though you may not actually receive goods or institution offers a discount for the early payment• Life insurance proceeds.
services from other members until a later tax of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-• Partnership income. year. count is canceled debt. You must include the
canceled amount in your income.• S Corporation income.
Example 3. You own a small apartment• Recoveries (including state income tax re- Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of
funds). tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgagean apartment, an artist gives you a work of art
(recourse debt), and you are relieved of theshe created. You must report as rental income• Rents from personal property. mortgage when you dispose of the property, youon Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In-
• Repayments. may realize gain or loss up to the fair marketcome and Loss, the fair market value of the
value of the property. To the extent the mort-artwork, and the artist must report as income on• Royalties. gage discharge exceeds the fair market value ofSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ
• Unemployment benefits. the property, it is income from discharge of in-(Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart-
debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusionment.• Welfare and other public assistance bene- under Excluded debt, later. Report any incomefits. Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness
These discussions are followed by brief discus- exchanged property or services through a barter debt that does not qualify for exclusion as other
sions of other income items. exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker income on Form 1040, line 21.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 85

Page 88 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be able to exclude part of the direction of a governmental unit or a
mortgage relief on your principal resi- tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- Host or Hostessdence. See Excluded debt, later. tion. Section 501(c)(3) organizations
TIP
are defined in chapter 24. If you host a party or event at which sales areIf you are not personally liable for a mortgage
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving(nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of the A loan to refinance a qualified student loan the event is a payment for helping a direct sellermortgage when you dispose of the property also will qualify if it was made by an educational make sales. You must report this item as income(such as through foreclosure or repossession),
institution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organization at its fair market value.that relief is included in the amount you realize.
under its program designed as described in Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-You may have a taxable gain if the amount you
(3)(b) above. ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainmentrealize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-
expenses. These expenses are deductible aserty. Report any gain on nonbusiness property Education loan repayment assistance. miscellaneous itemized deductions subject toas a capital gain. Education loan repayments made to you by the the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),See Publication 4681 for more information. National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment but only up to the amount of income you receiveProgram (NHSC Loan Repayment Program), aStockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in for giving the party.state education loan repayment program eligiblea corporation and the corporation cancels or For more information about the 50% limit forfor funds under the Public Health Service Act, orforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a meal and entertainment expenses, see chapterany other state loan repayment or loan forgive-constructive distribution that is generally divi- 26.
ness program that is intended to provide for thedend income to you. For more information, see
increased availability of health services in un-Publication 542, Corporations.
derserved or health professional shortage areasIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and
are not taxable.you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- Life Insurancetion, you generally do not realize income. This is The provision relating to the ªotherbecause the canceled debt is considered as a state loan repayment or loan forgive- Proceedscontribution to the capital of the corporation ness programº was added to this exclu-
TIPequal to the amount of debt principal that you sion for amounts received in tax years beginning Life insurance proceeds paid to you because ofcanceled. the death of the insured person are not taxableafter December 31, 2008. If you included these
unless the policy was turned over to you for aamounts in income in 2009, you should file anRepayment of canceled debt. If you included
price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidamended tax return to exclude this income. Seea canceled amount in your income and later pay
under an accident or health insurance policy orForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Incomethe debt, you may be able to file a claim for
an endowment contract. However, interest in-Tax Return, and its instructions for details onrefund for the year the amount was included in
come received as a result of life insurance pro-filing.income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if
ceeds may be taxable.the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still
open. The statute of limitations generally does Proceeds not received in installments. IfDeductible debt. You do not have incomenot end until 3 years after the due date of your death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum orfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment oforiginal return. other than at regular intervals, include in yourthe debt would be deductible. This exception income only the benefits that are more than theapplies only if you use the cash method of ac- amount payable to you at the time of the insuredExceptions counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of person's death. If the benefit payable at death isPublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.There are several exceptions to the inclusion of not specified, you include in your income the
canceled debt in income. These are explained benefit payments that are more than the present
next. value of the payments at the time of death.Price reduced after purchase. Generally, if
the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe Proceeds received in installments. If you re-Student loans. Certain student loans contain for property you purchased, you do not have ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to income from the reduction. The reduction of the you can exclude part of each installment fromattend the qualified educational institution will be debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment your income.canceled if you work for a certain period of time and reduces your basis in the property. To determine the excluded part, divide thein certain professions for any of a broad class of
amount held by the insurance company (gener-employers.
ally the total lump sum payable at the death ofYou do not have income if your student loan Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled
the insured person) by the number of install-is canceled after you agreed to this provision debt in your gross income in the following situa-
ments to be paid. Include anything over thisand then performed the services required. To tions.
excluded part in your income as interest.qualify, the loan must have been made by: • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case
Surviving spouse. If your spouse diedunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-1. The Federal Government, a state or local before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. government, or an instrumentality, agency, ceeds paid to you because of the death of youror subdivision thereof, • The debt is canceled when you are insol- spouse are received in installments, you can
vent. However, you cannot exclude any2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
amount of canceled debt that is more thanthat has assumed control of a state, cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you
county, or municipal hospital, and whose the amount by which you are insolvent. can continue to take the exclusion.
employees are considered public employ- See Publication 908. 
Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-ees under state law, or • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- der a life insurance policy for cash, you must
3. An educational institution celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 include in income any proceeds that are more
of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. than the cost of the life insurance policy. Ina. Under an agreement with an entity de- general, your cost (or investment in the contract)• The debt is qualified real property busi-scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationfunds to the institution to make the loan, insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,334. or rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were
• The cancellation is intended as a gift.b. As part of a program of the institution not included in your income.
designed to encourage students to  You should receive a Form 1099-R showing• The debt is qualified principal residenceserve in occupations or areas with un- the total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportindebtedness. See Publication 525 for ad-met needs and under which the serv- these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formditional information.ices provided are for or under the 1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 89 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information. For more information, see Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora-
Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525. tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S.ated death benefits made on a per diem or other
Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, andperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer
send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to eachMSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con-Endowment Contract shareholder. In addition, the S corporation willtracts, with your return. You do not have to file
Proceeds send each shareholder a copy of the Share-Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene-
holder's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Formfits paid on the basis of actual expenses in-
An endowment contract is a policy under which 1120S) to help each shareholder report his orcurred.
you are paid a specified amount of money on a her share of the S corporation's income, losses,
certain date unless you die before that date, in credits, and deductions.Public Safety Officer Killedwhich case, the money is paid to your desig-
Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) fornated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in in the Line of Duty your records. Do not attach it to youra lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if
Form 1040.
RECORDSthe proceeds are more than the cost of the If you are a survivor of a public safety officer who
policy. To determine your cost, subtract any was killed in the line of duty, you may be able to For more information on S corporations and
amount that you previously received under the exclude from income certain amounts you re- their shareholders, see Instructions for Form
contract and excluded from your income from ceive. 1120S.
the total premiums (or other consideration) paid    For this purpose, the term public safety
for the contract. Include the part of the lump sum officer includes law enforcement officers,
payment that is more than your cost in your firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and
income. ambulance crew members. For more informa- Recoveries
tion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,
and Administrators.Accelerated Death A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. TheBenefits most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may havePartnership Incomeefits under a life insurance contract or viatical
recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such assettlement before the insured's death are ex-
payments on previously deducted bad debts)A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.cluded from income if the insured is terminally or
and recoveries of items for which you previouslyThe income, gains, losses, deductions, andchronically ill.
claimed a tax credit.credits of a partnership are passed through toViatical settlement. This is the sale or assign- the partners based on each partner's distributive Tax benefit rule. You must include a recoveryment of any part of the death benefit under a life share of these items. in your income in the year you receive it up to theinsurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
amount by which the deduction or credit youvider. A viatical settlement provider is a person Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). Although a part- took for the recovered amount reduced your taxwho regularly engages in the business of buying nership generally pays no tax, it must file an in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-or taking assignment of life insurance contracts information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of crease to an amount carried over to the currenton the lives of insured individuals who are termi- Partnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 year that resulted from the deduction or credit isnally or chronically ill and who meets the require- (Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal partnership will send each partner a copy of the lier year. For more information, see PublicationRevenue Code. Partner's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 525.1065) to help each partner report his or herExclusion for terminal illness.   Accelerated
share of the partnership's income, deductions, Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-death benefits are fully excludable if the insured
credits, and tax preference items. eral income taxes are not included in your in-is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
come because they are never allowed as ahas been certified by a physician as having an Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) for
deduction from income.illness or physical condition that can reasonably your records. Do not attach it to your
be expected to result in death within 24 months Form 1040.
RECORDS State tax refund. If you received a state orfrom the date of the certification.
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) inFor more information on partnerships, see
Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured 2010, you generally must include it in income ifPublication 541, Partnerships.
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis Qualified joint venture. If you and your payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-
of costs incurred for qualified long-term care spouse each materially participate as the only ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2011.
services are fully excludable. Accelerated death members of a jointly owned and operated busi- The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form
benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the State and
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit you can make a joint election to be treated as a Local Income Tax Refund worksheet in the 2010
applies to the total of the accelerated death qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the
benefits and any periodic payments received To make this election, you must divide all items amount (if any) to include in your income. See
from long-term care insurance contracts. For of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at- Publication 525 for when you must use another
information on the limit and the definitions of tributable to the business between you and your worksheet.
chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care spouse in accordance with your respective inter- If you could choose to deduct for a tax year
services, and long-term care insurance con- ests in the venture. Each of you must file a either:
tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form • State and local income taxes, ortracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in 1040).
Publication 525. • State and local general sales taxes, then
the maximum refund that you may have to in-Exception. The exclusion does not apply to
clude in income is limited to the excess of the taxany amount paid to a person (other than the
S Corporation Income you chose to deduct for that year over the taxinsured) who has an insurable interest in the life
you did not choose to deduct for that year. Forof the insured because the insured:
In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on examples, see Publication 525.• Is a director, officer, or employee of the its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-person, or tions, and credits of the corporation are passed Mortgage interest refund. If you received a
through to the shareholders based on each• Has a financial interest in the person's refund or credit in 2010 of mortgage interest paid
shareholder's pro rata share.business. in an earlier year, the amount should be shown
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

Page 90 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest your local general sales tax was more than
Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount $400. Rents from Personalfrom the interest you paid in 2010. You may Your total recoveries are less than thehave to include it in your income under the rules Propertyamount by which your itemized deductions ex-explained in the following discussions. ceeded the standard deduction ($13,000 −
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-Interest on recovery. Interest on any of the 11,400 = $1,600), so you must include your total ment or vehicles, how you report your incomeamounts you recover must be reported as inter- recoveries in your income for 2010. Report the and expenses is generally determined by:est income in the year received. For example, state and local income tax refund of $400 onreport any interest you received on state or local • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of yourincome tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a. ness, andrecoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
Recovery and expense in same year. If the • Whether or not the rental activity is con-
refund or other recovery and the expense occur ducted for profit.Standard deduction for earlier years. To de-in the same year, the recovery reduces the de- termine if amounts recovered in 2010 must be Generally, if your primary purpose is income orduction or credit and is not reported as income. profit and you are involved in the rental activityincluded in your income, you must know the
Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive with continuity and regularity, your rental activitystandard deduction for your filing status for the
a refund or other recovery that is for amounts is a business. See Publication 535, Businessyear the deduction was claimed. Standard de-
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must Expenses, for details on deducting expenses forduction amounts for 2009, 2008, and 2007, areallocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered both business and not-for-profit activities.in Publication 525.amount between the years in which you paid it.
This allocation is necessary to determine the Reporting business income and expenses.Example. You filed a joint return on Formamount of recovery from any earlier years and to If you are in the business of renting personal1040 for 2009 with taxable income of $45,000.determine the amount, if any, of your allowable property, report your income and expenses onYour itemized deductions were $12,050. Thededuction for this item for the current year. For Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The
standard deduction that you could have claimedinformation on how to compute the allocation, form instructions have information on how to
was $11,400. In 2010, you recovered $2,100 ofsee Recoveries in Publication 525. complete them.
your 2009 itemized deductions. None of the re-
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you arecoveries were more than the actual deductionsItemized Deduction not in the business of renting personal property,for 2009. Include $650 of the recoveries in your
Recoveries report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.2010 income. This is the smaller of your recov-
List the type and amount of the income on theeries ($2,100) or the amount by which your item-If you recover any amount that you deducted in dotted line next to line 21.ized deductions were more than the standardan earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
deduction ($12,050 − $11,400 = $650).generally must include the full amount of the Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you
recovery in your income in the year you receive rent personal property for profit, include yourIf you could claim an additional stan-
it. rental expenses in the total amount you enter ondard deduction for certain taxes or a
Form 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount andnet disaster loss, increase your stan-
TIPWhere to report. Enter your state or local in- ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36.dard deduction for that year.come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and the If you do not rent personal property for profit,total of all other recoveries as other income on your deductions are limited and you cannot re-Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040A Recovery limited to deduction. You do not port a loss to offset other income. See  Activityor Form 1040EZ. include in your income any amount of your re- not for profit, under Other Income, later.
covery that is more than the amount you de-Standard deduction limit. You generally are
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do ducted in the earlier year. The amount you
not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized include in your income is limited to the smaller
deductions that are more than your standard of: Repayments
deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
• The amount deducted on Schedule Aless you are required to itemize your deduc- If you had to repay an amount that you included(Form 1040), ortions). If your total deductions on the earlier year in your income in an earlier year, you may be
return were not more than your income for that able to deduct the amount repaid from your• The amount recovered.year, include in your income this year the lesser income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
of: the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, youExample. During 2009 you paid $1,700 for may be able to take a credit against your tax for• Your recoveries, or medical expenses. From this amount you sub- the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you
• The amount by which your itemized de- tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
ductions exceeded the standard deduc- gross income. Your actual medical expense de- ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in
tion. duction was $200. In 2010, you received a $500 your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-
reimbursement from your medical insurance for tion.
your 2009 expenses. The only amount of theExample. For 2009, you filed a joint return.
Type of deduction. The type of deduction youYour taxable income was $60,000 and you were $500 reimbursement that must be included in
are allowed in the year of repayment dependsnot entitled to any tax credits. Your standard your income for 2010 is $200 Ðthe amount ac- on the type of income you included in the earlierdeduction was $11,400, and you had itemized tually deducted. year. You generally deduct the repayment ondeductions of $13,000. In 2010, you received
the same form or schedule on which you previ-the following recoveries for amounts deducted
Other recoveries. See Recoveries in Publica- ously reported it as income. For example, if youon your 2009 return:
reported it as self-employment income, deduct ittion 525 if:
as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-Medical expenses ............. . $200 • You have recoveries of items other than ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (FormState and local income tax refund ... . 400 itemized deductions, or 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductRefund of mortgage interest ....... . 325
it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If• You received a recovery for an item forTotal recoveries ............... . $925 you reported it as wages, unemployment com-which you claimed a tax credit (other than
None of the recoveries were more than the de- pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductinvestment credit or foreign tax credit) in aductions taken for 2009. The difference between it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction onprior year.the state and local income tax you deducted and Schedule A (Form 1040).
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 91 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repaid social security benefits. If you re- Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from • Benefits paid by a state or the District of
paid social security benefits or equivalent rail- oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount Columbia from the Federal Unemployment
road retirement benefits, see Repayment of you receive when natural resources are ex- Trust Fund.
benefits in chapter 11. tracted from your property. The royalties are • State unemployment insurance benefits.based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and
Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount • Railroad unemployment compensationare paid to you by a person or company who
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from benefits.leases the property from you.
your income in the year you repaid it. If you must
• Disability payments from a governmentDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco-deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
program paid as a substitute for unem-nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasenter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
ployment compensation. (Amounts re-wells, you can recover your investment through
ceived as workers' compensation forthe depletion allowance. For information on thisRepayment over $3,000. If the amount you
injuries or illness are not unemploymentsubject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct
compensation. See chapter 5 for more in-the repayment (as explained under Type of de- Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- formation.)duction, earlier). However, you can choose in- stances, you can treat amounts you receivestead to take a tax credit for the year of • Trade readjustment allowances under thefrom the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-repayment if you included the income under a Trade Act of 1974.ments from the sale of a capital asset, ratherclaim of right. This means that at the time you than as royalty income. For information about • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-included the income, it appeared that you had an gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for this aster Relief and Emergency Assistancesee Publication 544.choice, figure your tax under both methods and Act. 
compare the results. Use the method (deduction Sale of property interest. If you sell your
or credit) that results in less tax. Governmental program. If you contributecomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,
to a governmental unemployment compensa-the amount you receive is considered paymentMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2010 claiming tion program and your contributions are not de-for the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltya deduction for the repaid amount. If you must ductible, amounts you receive under theincome. Under certain circumstances, the salededuct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, program are not included as unemploymentis subject to capital gain or loss treatment onenter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
compensation until you recover your contribu-Schedule D (Form 1040). For more informationMethod 2. Figure your tax for 2010 claiming tions. If you deducted all of your contributions toon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these the program, the entire amount you receiveof Publication 544.steps. under the program is included in your income.If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for1. Figure your tax for 2010 without deducting Repayment of unemployment compensa-
the life of the property, you have made a lease orthe repaid amount. tion. If you repaid in 2010 unemployment
a sublease, and any cash you receive for the compensation you received in 2010, subtract2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year assignment of other interests in the property is the amount you repaid from the total amount youwithout including in income the amount ordinary income subject to a depletion allow- received and enter the difference on line 19 ofyou repaid in 2010. ance. Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourPart of future production sold. If you ownon your return for the earlier year. This is entry enter ªRepaidº and the amount you repaid.mineral property but sell part of the future pro-the credit. If you repaid unemployment compensation induction, you generally treat the money you re-
2010 that you included in income in an earlier4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a
year, you can deduct the amount repaid on2010 figured without the deduction (Step loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you itemize1). income or take depletion based on it.
deductions. If the amount is more than $3,000,When production begins, you include all theIf method 1 results in less tax, deduct the see Repayments, earlier.proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that Tax withholding. You can choose to haveclaim the credit figured in (3) above on Form
amount to arrive at your taxable income from the1040, line 72, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in the federal income tax withheld from your unem-
property.column to the right of line 72. ployment compensation. To make this choice,
An example of this computation can be found complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding
in Publication 525. Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will
be withheld at 10% of your payment.
Unemployment If you do not choose to have tax with-
held from your unemployment com-
Royalties Benefits pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
!
estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax,
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, The tax treatment of unemployment benefits you either through withholding or estimated tax, or a
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary receive depends on the type of program paying combination of both, you may have to pay a
income. the benefits. penalty. For more information on estimated tax,
You generally report royalties in Part I of see chapter 4.
Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold Unemployment compensation. You must in-
an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in clude in income all unemployment compensa- Supplemental unemployment benefits.business as a self-employed writer, inventor, tion you receive. You should receive a Form Benefits received from an employer-financedartist, etc., report your income and expenses on 1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy- fund (to which the employees did not contribute)Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). ment compensation paid to you. Generally, you are not unemployment compensation. They areenter unemployment compensation on line 19 of taxable as wages and are subject to withholdingCopyrights and patents. Royalties from Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of for income tax. They may be subject to socialcopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, Form 1040EZ. security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-and similar property, or from patents on inven-
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment BenefitsTypes of unemployment compensation.tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use
Unemployment compensation generally in- in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer'syour work over a specified period of time. Royal-
cludes any amount received under an unem- Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay-ties generally are based on the number of units
ployment compensation law of the United States ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orsold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
or of a state. It includes the following benefits. on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.performance, or machines sold.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 89

Page 92 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repayment of benefits. You may have to Alternative trade adjustment assistance • A disaster which results from a terrorist or
repay some of your supplemental unemploy- (ATAA) payments. Payments you receive military action;
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment from a state agency under the Demonstration • A federally declared disaster; orallowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
• A disaster which results from an accidentrepay supplemental unemployment benefits in tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-
involving a common carrier, or from anythe same year you receive them, reduce the cluded in your income. The state must send you
other event, which is determined to be cat-total benefits by the amount you repay. If you Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount you
astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasuryrepay the benefits in a later year, you must should include in income. The amount should be
or his or her delegate.include the full amount of the benefits received reported on Form 1040, line 21.
in your income for the year you received them.
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster isDeduct the repayment in the later year as an Persons with disabilities. If you have a disa-
qualified if it is determined by an applicableadjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (You bility, you must include in income compensation
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- you receive for services you perform unless the
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, and compensation is otherwise excluded. However,
ment, agency, or instrumentality.enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and the amount on the you do not include in income the value of goods,
dotted line next to line 36. If the amount you services, and cash that you receive, not in return
Disaster mitigation payments. You also canrepay in a later year is more than $3,000, you for your services, but for your training and reha-
exclude from income any amount you receivemay be able to take a credit against your tax for bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-
that is a qualified disaster mitigation payment.the later year instead of deducting the amount ble amounts include payments for transportation
Like qualified disaster relief payments, qualifiedrepaid. For more information on this, see Repay- and attendant care, such as interpreter services
disaster mitigation payments are also most com-ments, earlier. for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and
monly paid to you in the period immediatelyservices to help mentally retarded persons do
following damage to property as a result of aPrivate unemployment fund. Unemploy- their work.
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigationment benefit payments from a private (nonun-
payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduceion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are Disaster relief grants. Do not include the severity of) potential damage from futuretaxable only if the amounts you receive are more post-disaster grants received under the Disaster natural disasters. They are paid to you throughthan your total payments into the fund. Report Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in your state and local governments based on the provi-the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21. income if the grant payments are made to help sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Reliefyou meet necessary expenses or serious needs and Emergency Assistance Act or the NationalPayments by a union. Benefits paid to you as for medical, dental, housing, personal property, Flood Insurance Act.an unemployed member of a union from regular transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de- You cannot increase the basis or adjustedunion dues are included in your income on Form duct casualty losses or medical expenses that basis of your property for improvements made1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to a are specifically reimbursed by these disaster with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.special union fund and your payments to the relief grants. If you have deducted a casualty
fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben- loss for the loss of your personal residence and Home Affordable Modification Programefits you receive from the fund are includible in you later receive a disaster relief grant for the (HAMP). If you benefit fromyour income only to the extent they are more loss of the same residence, you may have to Pay-for-Performance Success Payments underthan your contributions. include part or all of the grant in your taxable HAMP, the payments are not taxable.income. See Recoveries, earlier. Unemploy-
Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- ment assistance payments under the Act are Mortgage assistance payments. Paymentsceive from your employer during periods of un- taxable unemployment compensation. See Un- made under section 235 of the National Housingemployment, under a union agreement that employment compensation  under Unemploy- Act for mortgage assistance are not included inguarantees you full pay during the year, are ment Benefits, earlier. the homeowner's income. Interest paid for thetaxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form Disaster relief payments. You can exclude gram cannot be deducted.1040EZ. from income any amount you receive that is a
Medicare. Medicare benefits received underqualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-State employees. Payments similar to a title XVIII of the Social Security Act are notaster relief payment is an amount paid to you: state's unemployment compensation may be includible in the gross income of the individuals
made by the state to its employees who are not 1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- for whom they are paid. This includes basic (part
covered by the state's unemployment compen- essary personal, family, living, or funeral A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax- expenses that result from a qualified disas- and supplementary (part B (Supplementary
able, do not report them as unemployment ter; Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
compensation. Report these payments on Form 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance1040, line 21. essary expenses incurred for the repair or benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re- section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act
placement of its contents to the extent it is are not includible in the gross income of the
due to a qualified disaster; individuals to whom they are paid. This appliesWelfare and Other to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,sale of transportation as a common carrierPublic Assistance widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, asbecause of the death or personal physical
well as the lump-sum death payment.injuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedBenefits
disaster; or Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food
Do not include in your income governmental 4. By a federal, state, or local government, or benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
benefit payments from a public welfare fund agency, or instrumentality in connection gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-
based upon need, such as payments due to with a qualified disaster in order to pro- pare and serve free meals for the program,
blindness. Payments from a state fund for the mote the general welfare. include in your income as wages the cash pay
victims of crime should not be included in the you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodYou can exclude this amount only to the extentvictims' incomes if they are in the nature of benefits.any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applypenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
if you were a participant or conspirator in amust include in your income any welfare pay- Payments made by a state to qualified people to
terrorist action or his or her representative.ments that are compensation for services or that reduce their cost of winter energy use are not
are obtained fraudulently. A qualified disaster is: taxable.
Page 90 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 93 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse- unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are
ments. You generally should not report these taxable to you. These plans make the minimumOther Income reimbursements on your return unless you are monthly payment on your credit card account if
figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. you cannot make the payment due to injury,The following brief discussions are arranged in See chapter 25, for more information. illness, disability, or unemployment. Report onalphabetical order. Income items that are dis- Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youcussed in greater detail in another publication Child support payments. You should not re- received during the year that is more than theinclude a reference to that publication. port these payments on your return. See chapter amount of the premiums you paid during the18 for more information. year.Activity not for profit. You must include on
your return income from an activity from which Court awards and damages. To determine if Down payment assistance. If you purchaseyou do not expect to make a profit. An example settlement amounts you receive by compromise a home and receive assistance from a nonprofitof this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you or judgment must be included in your income, corporation to make the down payment, thatoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure. you must consider the item that the settlement assistance is not included in your income. If theEnter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc- replaces. The character of the income as ordi- corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitabletions for expenses related to the activity are nary income or capital gain depends on the organization, the assistance is treated as a giftlimited. They cannot total more than the income nature of the underlying claim. Include the fol- and is included in your basis of the house. If theyou report and can be taken only if you itemize lowing as ordinary income. corporation does not qualify, the assistance isdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase1. Interest on any award.Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica- price and is not included in your basis.tion 535 for information on whether an activity is 2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits
considered carried on for a profit. Economic recovery payment. If you re-in most cases.
ceived an economic recovery payment, such asAlaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re- 3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does the payments of $250 made to certain recipientsceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income not matter if they relate to a physical injury of social security, SSI, railroad retirement, orfund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report or physical sickness. certain veterans' benefits, it is not taxable forit as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of federal income tax purposes, but it reduces any4. Amounts received in settlement of pensionForm 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The making work pay credit.rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).state of Alaska sends each recipient a document
Employment agency fees. If you get a jobthat shows the amount of the payment with the 5. Damages for:
through an employment agency, and the fee ischeck. The amount also is reported to IRS.
a. Patent or copyright infringement, paid by your employer, the fee is not includible in
Alimony. Include in your income on Form your income if you are not liable for it. However,b. Breach of contract, or1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re- if you pay it and your employer reimburses you
ceive. Amounts you receive for child support are c. Interference with business operations. for it, it is includible in your income.
not income to you. Alimony and child support
Energy conservation subsidies. You canpayments are discussed in chapter 18. 6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis- exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-tress received to satisfy a claim under TitleBribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.income. ties for the purchase or installation of an energy
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- conservation measure for a dwelling unit.Campaign contributions. These contribu- gent fees) where the underlying recovery Energy conservation measure. This in-tions are not income to a candidate unless they is included in gross income. cludes installations or modifications that are pri-are diverted to his or her personal use. To be
Do not include in your income compensatory marily designed to reduce consumption ofexempt from tax, the contributions must be
damages for personal physical injury or physical electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund
sickness (whether received in a lump sum or agement of energy demand.for use in future campaigns. However, interest
installments).earned on bank deposits, dividends received on Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-contributed securities, and net gains realized on Emotional distress. Emotional distress it- ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-sales of contributed securities are taxable and self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, lar property. If a building or structure containsmust be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In- but damages you receive for emotional distress both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustcome Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza- due to a physical injury or sickness are treated be properly allocated.tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an as received for the physical injury or sickness. Estate and trust income.     An estate or trust,office account must be included in the office- Do not include them in your income. unlike a partnership, may have to pay federalholder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in the If the emotional distress is due to a personal income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateyear transferred. injury that is not due to a physical injury or or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itssickness (for example, employment discrimina-Car pools. Do not include in your income income distributed or required to be distributedtion or injury to reputation), you must include theamounts you receive from the passengers for to you. However, there is never a double tax.damages in your income, except for any dam-driving a car in a car pool to and from work. Estates and trusts file their returns on Formages you receive for medical care due to thatThese amounts are considered reimbursement 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andemotional distress. Emotional distress includesfor your expenses. However, this rule does not Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedphysical symptoms that result from emotionalapply if you have developed car pool arrange- to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).distress, such as headaches, insomnia, andments into a profit-making business of transport- stomach disorders. Current income required to be distributed.ing workers for hire. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustDeduction for costs involved in unlawfulCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from that must distribute all of its current income, youdiscrimination suits. You may be able to de-a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy is must report your share of the distributable netduct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-not income, but you must reduce your basis by income, whether or not you actually received it.cover a judgment or settlement for a claim ofthe amount of the rebate. unlawful discrimination under various provisions Current income not required to be distrib-
of federal, state, and local law listed in Internal uted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate orExample. You buy a new car for $24,000 Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whethercash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from the United States government, or a claim under to distribute all or part of the current income, youthe manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income to section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. must report:you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is the For more information, see Publication 525.basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell • All income that is required to be distributed
the car and depreciation if you use it for busi- Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re- to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-
ness. ceive benefits under a credit card disability or uted, plus
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 91

Page 94 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• All other amounts actually paid or credited friend's or relative's estate), report these fees on Providers), to help you determine the amount
to you, you can deduct for the use of your home.Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or
business of being an executor, report these feesup to the amount of your share of distributable Found property. If you find and keep propertyas self-employment income on Schedule C ornet income. that does not belong to you that has been lost orSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not
abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to youHow to report. Treat each item of income includible in income if it is waived.
at its fair market value in the first year it is yourthe same way that the estate or trust would treat Manager of trade or business for bank- undisputed possession.it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay-distributed to you, you report the distribution as ments received from your bankruptcy estate for Free tour. If you received a free tour from adividend income on your return. The same rule managing or operating a trade or business that travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. you must include its value in your income. Re-and capital gains.
Report this income on Form 1040, line 21. port the fair market value of the tour on FormThe fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade oryou the type of items making up your share of Notary public.  Report payments for these
business of organizing tours. You cannot deductthe estate or trust income and any credits you services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
your expenses in serving as the voluntary leaderare allowed on your individual income tax return. (Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
of the group at the group's request. If you organ-self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener- ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour'stions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries. value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
Election precinct official. You should re-Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor 1040).
ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ices performed as an election official or election Gambling winnings. You must include yourciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over
worker. Report these payments on line 7 of gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, linethe trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 21. If you itemize your deductions on Scheduleproperty to the trust.) This rule applies if the
1040EZ. A (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling lossesproperty (or income from the property) put into
you had during the year, but only up to thethe trust will or may revert (be returned) to the
amount of your winnings. See chapter 28  forFoster care providers. Payments you re-grantor or the grantor's spouse.
information on recordkeeping.Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at qualified foster care placement agency for pro- Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter-the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the viding care to qualified foster individuals in your ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-value of the transferred property. home generally are not included in your income. tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourHowever, you must include in your income pay- income the fair market value of bonds, cars,Expenses paid by another. If your personal ments received for the care of more than 5 houses, and other noncash prizes.expenses are paid for by another person, such individuals age 19 or older and certain diffi-
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to If you win a state lottery prize payableculty-of-care payments.
you depending upon your relationship with that in installments, see Publication 525 forA qualified foster individual is a person who:person and the nature of the payment. But if the more information.
TIP
payment makes up for a loss caused by that 1. Is living in a foster family home, and
person, and only restores you to the position you Form W-2G. You may have received a2. Was placed there by:were in before the loss, the payment is not Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-
includible in your income. ing the amount of your gambling winnings anda. An agency of a state or one of its politi-
any tax taken out of them. Include the amountcal subdivisions, orFees for services. Include all fees for your from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include theservices in your income. Examples of these fees b. A qualified foster care placement amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 61,are amounts you receive for services you per- agency. as federal income tax withheld.form as:
Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property• A corporate director, Difficulty-of-care payments. These are
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isadditional payments that are designated by the• An executor, administrator, or personal not included in your income. However, if prop-payer as compensation for providing the addi-representative of an estate, erty you receive this way later produces incometional care that is required for physically, men-
such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income• A manager of a trade or business you op- tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
is taxable to you. If property is given to a trusterated before declaring Chapter 11 bank- individuals. A state must determine that the ad-
and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-ruptcy, ditional compensation is needed, and the care
tributed to you, that income is also taxable tofor which the payments are made must be pro-• A notary public, or you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is thevided in your home.
income from the property, that income is taxable• An election precinct official. You must include in your income diffi- to you.culty-of-care payments received for more than:Nonemployee compensation. If you are Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a• 10 qualified foster individuals under agenot an employee and the fees for your services pension or an individual retirement arrangement19, orfrom the same payer total $600 or more for the (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-year, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. You • 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or ited amount in your income. See chapter 10 ifmay need to report your fees as older. you inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if youself-employment income. See Self-Employed inherited an IRA.Persons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of when Maintaining space in home. If you are paidyou are considered self-employed. to maintain space in your home for emergency Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not
foster care, you must include the payment in deductible from other income. A hobby is anCorporate director. Corporate director
your income. activity from which you do not expect to make afees are self-employment income. Report these
profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier.payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-(Form 1040). ceive payments that you must include in your If you collect stamps, coins, or other
income, you are in business as a foster care items as a hobby for recreation andPersonal representatives. All personal
pleasure, and you sell any of the items,provider and you are self-employed. Report therepresentatives must include in their gross in-
CAUTION
!
your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (Seepayments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZcome fees paid to them from an estate. If you
chapter 16.) However, if you sell items from your(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessare not in the trade or business of being an
collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycareexecutor (for instance, you are the executor of a
Page 92 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 95 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi- you must report this income on Form 1040, line Sale of personal items. If you sold an item
ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs, 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not include you owned for personal use, such as a car,
must be included in your income on Form 1040, its value in your income. refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or
line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.Prizes and awards in goods or services must
(Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ- Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-be included in your income at their fair market
ity. not deduct a loss.value.
However, if you sold an item you held forIndian fishing rights. If you are a member of Employee awards or bonuses. Cash investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights awards or bonuses given to you by your em- or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainsecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of ployer for good work or suggestions generally and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not include must be included in your income as wages.
in your income amounts you receive from activi- However, certain noncash employee achieve- Example. You sold a painting on an onlineties related to those fishing rights. The income is ment awards can be excluded from income. See auction website for $100. You bought the paint-not subject to income tax, self-employment tax, Bonuses and awards in chapter 5. ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportor employment taxes. your gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (FormPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you
1040).Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
exclude from your income the amount of interest plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
Scholarships and fellowships. A candidateearned on a frozen deposit. See Interest income tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you
for a degree can exclude amounts received as aon frozen deposits in chapter 7. generally must include the value of the prize in
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedyour income. However, you do not include thisInterest on qualified savings bonds. You scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-may be able to exclude from income the interest ceive that is for:ing requirements.from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if
• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anyou pay qualified higher educational expenses • You were selected without any action on
educational institution, orin the same year. For more information on this your part to enter the contest or proceed-
exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro- ing. • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-
gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7. quired for courses at the educational insti-• You are not required to perform substan-
tution.Job interview expenses. If a prospective em- tial future services as a condition to receiv-
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and ing the prize or award. Amounts used for room and board do not qualify
either pays you an allowance or reimburses you for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more• The prize or award is transferred by thefor your transportation and other travel ex- information on qualified scholarships and fellow-payer directly to a governmental unit orpenses, the amount you receive is generally not ship grants.tax-exempt charitable organization as des-taxable. You include in income only the amount ignated by you. Payment for services. Generally, you mustyou receive that is more than your actual ex-
include in income the part of any scholarship orpenses. See Publication 525 for more information about
fellowship that represents payment for past,the conditions that apply to the transfer.Jury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must be present, or future teaching, research, or other
included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. If services. This applies even if all candidates for aQualified tuition programs (QTPs). A quali-you must give the pay to your employer because degree must perform the services to receive thefied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-your employer continues to pay your salary degree.gram) is a program set up to allow you to eitherwhile you serve on the jury, you can deduct the For information about the rules that apply toprepay or contribute to an account establishedamount turned over to your employer as an a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided tofor paying a student's qualified higher educationadjustment to your income. Enter the amount employees and their families by an educationalexpenses at an eligible educational institution. Ayou repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36. institution, see Publication 970.program can be established and maintained byEnter ªJury Payº and the amount on the dotted a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-line next to line 36. or an eligible educational institution. partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
Kickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, side The part of a distribution representing the your income. These allowances are not consid-
commissions, push money, or similar payments amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
you receive in your income on Form 1040, line included in income. This is a return of the invest- Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form ment in the program. are not scholarships or fellowships if you do not1040), if from your self-employment activity. The beneficiary generally does not include in have to use the prizes for educational purposes.income any earnings distributed from a QTP if You must include these amounts in your incomeExample. You sell cars and help arrange the total distribution is less than or equal to on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you usecar insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay adjusted qualified higher education expenses. the amounts for educational purposes.back part of their commissions to you for refer- See Publication 970 for more information.
ring customers to them. You must include the Stolen property. If you steal property, youkickbacks in your income. Railroad retirement annuities. The following must report its fair market value in your incometypes of payments are treated as pension or in the year you steal it unless in the same year,Medical savings accounts (MSAs). You annuity income and are taxable under the rules you return it to its rightful owner.generally do not include in income amounts you explained in chapter 11.withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare
Transporting school children. Do not in-Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are clude in your income a school board mileagequalified medical expenses. Generally, qualified more than the social security equivalent allowance for taking children to and from schoolmedical expenses are those you can deduct on benefit. if you are not in the business of taking children toSchedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions. • Tier 2 benefits. school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-For more information about qualified medical
ing this transportation.expenses, see chapter 21. For more information • Vested dual benefits.
about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage Union benefits and dues. Amounts deductedMSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac- from your pay for union dues, assessments,Rewards. If you receive a reward for providingcounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. contributions, or other payments to a union can-information, include it in your income.
Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a not be excluded from your income.
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz Sale of home. You may be able to exclude You may be able to deduct some of these
program, beauty contest, or other event, you from income all or part of any gain from the sale payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
must include it in your income. For example, if or exchange of your main home. See chapter to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to your
you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, 15. job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 93

Page 96 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040). For more information, see Union benefits from your income only when the facts • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
Dues and Expenses in chapter 28. clearly show that the union intended them as tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
gifts to you.Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid • A nonrefundable credit against the
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, Utility rebates. If you are a customer of an purchase price of the electricity.
including both cash and the fair market value of electric utility company and you participate in the The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-other property, are usually included in your in- utility's energy conservation program, you may able credit is not included in your income.come as compensation. You can exclude these receive on your monthly electric bill either:
Page 94 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 97 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use Ð including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 25 in Part Five.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according
Assets to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of
the land and buildings at the time of purchase.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses13. Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
❏ 551 Basis of Assets lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the
FMV of that asset and the denominator is the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions FMV of the whole property at the time of
Basis of ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs of the
land and buildings, you can allocateProperty
the basis according to their assessed
TIP
values for real estate tax purposes.Cost Basis
Fair market value (FMV). FMV is the priceIntroduction The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. at which the property would change hands be-The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtThis chapter discusses how to figure your basis tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neitherobligations, other property, or services. Yourin property. It is divided into the following sec- having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-tions. ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Saleslowing items: of similar property on or about the same date• Cost basis.
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-• Sales tax,
• Adjusted basis. erty.• Freight,
• Basis other than cost. Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-• Installation and testing,
erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)Your basis is the amount of your investment in • Excise taxes, an existing mortgage on the property, your basisproperty for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theygain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),disposition of property. Also use it to figure de-
ductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- • Revenue stamps, Settlement costs. Your basis includes thetion, and casualty losses. settlement fees and closing costs you paid for• Recording fees, andIf you use property for both business or in- buying the property. (A fee for buying property isvestment purposes and for personal purposes, • Real estate taxes (if you assume liability a cost that must be paid even if you buy theyou must allocate the basis based on the use. for the seller). property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsOnly the basis allocated to the business or in- for getting a loan on the property in your basis.In addition, the basis of real estate and businessvestment use of the property can be depreci- The following are some of the settlementassets may include other items.ated. fees or closing costs you can include in the basisYour original basis in property is adjusted of your property.Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy(increased or decreased) by certain events. For property on a time-payment plan that charges • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).example, if you make improvements to the prop- little or no interest, the basis of your property iserty, increase your basis. If you take deductions • Charges for installing utility services.your stated purchase price minus any amountfor depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer- considered to be unstated interest. You gener- • Legal fees (including fees for the titletain credits, reduce your basis. ally have unstated interest if your interest rate is search and preparation of the sales con-less than the applicable federal rate.Keep accurate records of all items that tract and deed). For more information, see Unstated Interestaffect the basis of your property. For
• Recording fees.and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publicationmore information on keeping records,
RECORDS
537.see chapter 1. • Survey fees.
• Transfer taxes. Real PropertyUseful Items
• Owner's title insurance.You may want to see: Real property, also called real estate, is land and • Any amounts the seller owes that yougenerally anything built on, growing on, or at-Publication agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-tached to land. est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesIf you buy real property, certain fees and❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe for improvements or repairs, and salesother expenses you pay are part of your costBenefits commissions.basis in the property.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Lump sum purchase. If you buy buildings Settlement costs do not include amounts❏ 535 Business Expenses and the land on which they stand for a lump placed in escrow for the future payment of items
❏ 537 Installment Sales sum, allocate the cost basis among the land and such as taxes and insurance.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 95

Page 98 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following are some of the settlement Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
basis of property. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Casualty insurance premiums. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
• Rent for occupancy of the property before Putting an addition on your home  subsidies for energy conservation
closing. Replacing an entire roof  measures
Paving your driveway• Charges for utilities or other services re-
Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductionslated to occupancy of the property before
Rewiring your home  and insurance reimbursementsclosing.
• Charges connected with getting a loan, • Assessments for local improvements:such as points (discount points, loan origi- Water connectionsnation fees), mortgage insurance premi-
Extending utility service lines to the • Postponed gain from the sale of a homeums, loan assumption fees, cost of a
propertycredit report, and fees for an appraisal re-
Sidewalks • Alternative motor vehicle credit quired by a lender.
(Form 8910)
• Fees for refinancing a mortgage. Roads
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit (Form 8911)Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes
the seller owed on real property you bought, and
the seller did not reimburse you, treat those • Residential energy credits (Form 5695)
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
them as an expense. • Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
Restoring damaged propertyIf you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller
paid for you, you can usually deduct that amount • Nontaxable corporate distributions
as an expense in the year of purchase. Do not • Legal fees:
include that amount in the basis of your property. Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must Fees for getting a reduction of an  income
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. assessment
• Zoning costs • EasementsPoints. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
ing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,
• Adoption tax benefitsor a home equity loan), do not add the points to
the basis of the related property. Generally, you
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- You must increase your basis in the propertymore information on how to deduct points, see
by the amount you spend on repairs that restoreroom, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb-chapter 23.
the property to its pre-casualty condition.ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving yourPoints on home mortgage. Special rules driveway. For more information on casualty and theftmay apply to points you and the seller pay when
losses, see chapter 25.you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If Assessments for local improvements.
certain requirements are met, you can deduct Add to the basis of property assessments for Depreciation and section 179 deduction.the points in full for the year in which they are improvements such as streets and sidewalks if Decrease the basis of your qualifying businesspaid. Reduce the basis of your home by any they increase the value of the property as- property by any section 179 deduction you takeseller-paid points. sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However, and the depreciation you deducted, or couldyou can deduct as taxes assessments for main- have deducted (including any special deprecia-tenance or repairs, or for meeting interest tion allowance), on your tax returns under thecharges related to the improvements. method of depreciation you selected.
Adjusted Basis For more information about depreciation andExample. Your city changes the street in
the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946front of your store into an enclosed pedestrianBefore figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange, and the Instructions for Form 4562.mall and assesses you and other affected prop-or other disposition of property or figuring allow- erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Addable depreciation, depletion, or amortization, Example. You owned a duplex used asthe assessment to your property's basis. In thisyou must usually make certain adjustments (in- rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichexample, the assessment is a depreciable as-creases and decreases) to the cost of the prop- $35,000 was allocated to the building andset.erty. The result is the adjusted basis. $5,000 to the land. You added an improvement
to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February last
Decreases to Basis year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to thatIncreases to Basis time, you had been allowed depreciation of
Decrease the basis of any property by all items $23,000. You sold some salvaged material forIncrease the basis of any property by all items that represent a return of capital for the period $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-properly added to a capital account. Examples during which you held the property. Examples of ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofof items that increase basis are shown in Table items that decrease basis are shown in Table $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.13-1. These include the items discussed below. 13-1. These include the items discussed below. You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds
for restoration of the duplex, which was com-
Improvements. Add to your basis in property pleted this year. You must use the duplex's
Casualty and theft losses. If you have a cas-the cost of improvements having a useful life of adjusted basis after the restoration to determine
ualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in yourmore than 1 year, that increase the value of the depreciation for the rest of the property's recov-
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- property by any insurance proceeds or other ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
ent use. For example, improvements include reimbursement and by any deductible loss not plex as follows:
putting a recreation room in your unfinished covered by insurance.
Page 96 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 99 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Original cost of duplex ........ . $35,000 property at the time it is transferred to you, less You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −
Addition to duplex ........... . 10,000 any amount you paid for it. Property is substan- $26,000). You bought replacement property
Total cost of duplex .......... . $45,000 tially vested when it is transferable or when it is similar in use to the converted property for
Minus: Depreciation ......... . 23,000 not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000
Adjusted basis before casualty ... . $22,000 do not have a good chance of losing it). For ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the
Minus: Insurance more information, see Restricted Property in payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain
proceeds ..... . $19,700 Publication 525. is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000Deducted casualty realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase isloss ......... . 1,000 The basis of the replacement property is figureda purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asSalvage proceeds  1,300  22,000 as follows:compensation for services, you buy goods orAdjusted basis after casualty .... . $-0-
Add: Cost of restoring duplex .... . 19,000 other property at less than FMV, include the Cost of replacement property ..... . $29,000Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000 difference between the purchase price and the Minus: Gain not recognized ...... . 3,000property's FMV in your income. Your basis in the Basis of replacement property .. . $26,000property is its FMV (your purchase price plus theNote. Your basis in the land is its original amount you include in income). cost of $5,000. Allocating the basis. If you buy more thanIf the difference between your purchase one piece of replacement property, allocate yourEasements. The amount you receive for price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis- basis among the properties based on their re-granting an easement is generally considered to count, do not include the difference in income. spective costs.be proceeds from the sale of an interest in real However, your basis in the property is still its
property. It reduces the basis of the affected part FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publication Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in
of the property. If the amount received is more 15-B. determining and depreciating the basis of
than the basis of the part of the property affected MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-
by the easement, reduce your basis in that part version. For information, see What Is the BasisTaxable Exchangesto zero and treat the excess as a recognized of Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
gain. Publication 946.A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isIf the gain is on a capital asset, see chapter taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain16 for information about how to report it. If the or deductible loss also is known as a recognized Nontaxable Exchangesgain is on property used in a trade or business, gain or loss. If you receive property in exchangesee Publication 544 for information about how to for other property in a taxable exchange, the A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichreport it. basis of the property you receive is usually its you are not taxed on any gain and you cannot
FMV at the time of the exchange.Exclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- deduct any loss. If you receive property in a
tion measures. You can exclude from gross nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the
income any subsidy you received from a public same as the basis of the property you trans-Involuntary Conversionsutility company for the purchase or installation of ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
an energy conservation measure for a dwelling If you receive replacement property as a result
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for which of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
you received the subsidy by the excluded Like-Kind Exchangestheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of the
amount. For more information about this sub- replacement property using the basis of the con- The exchange of property for the same kind ofsidy, see chapter 12. verted property. property is the most common type of nontaxablePostponed gain from sale of home. If you exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,Similar or related property. If you receivepostponed gain from the sale of your main home the property traded and the property receivedreplacement property similar or related in serv-under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you must be both of the following.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired ment property's basis is the same as the • Qualifying property.as a replacement by the amount of the post- converted property's basis on the date of theponed gain. For more information on the rules • Like-kind property.conversion, with the following adjustments.for the sale of a home, see chapter 15.
The basis of the property you receive is gener-1. Decrease the basis by the following.
ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-
a. Any loss you recognize on the involun- erty you gave up. If you trade property in a
tary conversion.Basis Other Than Cost like-kind exchange and also pay money, the
basis of the property received is the adjustedb. Any money you receive that you do not
There are many times when you cannot use cost basis of the property you gave up increased byspend on similar property.
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or the money you paid.
the adjusted basis of the property can be used. 2. Increase the basis by the following. Qualifying property. In a like-kind exchange,Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis you must hold for investment or for productivea. Any gain you recognize on the involun-were discussed earlier. use in your trade or business both the propertytary conversion.
you give up and the property you receive.
Property Received b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement
Like-kind property. There must be an ex-property.for Services change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-
ties are properties of the same nature orIf you receive property for your services, include Money or property not similar or related.  If character, even if they differ in grade or quality.its FMV in income. The amount you include in you receive money or property not similar or The exchange of real estate for real estate andincome becomes your basis. If the services related in service or use to the converted prop- personal property for similar personal propertywere performed for a price agreed on before- erty, and you buy replacement property similar are exchanges of like-kind property.hand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the or related in service or use to the convertedproperty if there is no evidence to the contrary. Example. You trade in an old truck used inproperty, the basis of the replacement property
Restricted property. If you receive prop- your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized
erty for your services and the property is subject for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowson the conversion.
to certain restrictions, your basis in the property you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.
is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. Example. The state condemned your prop- This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the
However, this rule does not apply if you make an erty. The adjusted basis of the property was new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old
election to include in income the FMV of the $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you sell your old truck to a third party for the adjusted basis and holding period of the purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a property as of the date of the transfer. sion and marital or charitable deduction that
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable For more information about the transfer of applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price property from a spouse, see chapter 14. see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and
minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of Gift Taxes.
the new truck is the price you pay the dealer. Property Received Example. In 2010, you received a gift of
Partially nontaxable exchanges. A partially as a Gift property from your mother that had an FMV of
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which $50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. The
To figure the basis of property you receive as ayou receive unlike property or money in addition amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was
gift, you must know its adjusted basis to theto like-kind property. The basis of the property $37,000 ($50,000 minus the $13,000 annual
donor just before it was given to you, its FMV atyou receive is the same as the adjusted basis of exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $7,540 on the
the time it was given to you, and any gift tax paidthe property you gave up, with the following property. Your basis is $26,107, figured as fol-
on it.adjustments. lows:
1. Decrease the basis by the following FMV less than donor's adjusted basis. If the Fair market value ............. . $50,000
amounts. FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less Minus: Adjusted basis .......... . −20,000
than the donor's adjusted basis, your basis de- Net increase in value .......... . $30,000a. Any money you receive. pends on whether you have a gain or a loss
when you dispose of the property. Your basis for Gift tax paid ................ . $7,540b. Any loss you recognize on the ex-
Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷  $37,000) .. . ×  .81figuring gain is the same as the donor's adjustedchange.
Gift tax due to net increase in value $6,107basis plus or minus any required adjustments to
Adjusted basis of property to yourbasis while you held the property. Your basis for2. Increase the basis by the following
mother .................... . +20,000figuring loss is its FMV when you received theamounts.
Your basis in the property ...... . $26,107gift plus or minus any required adjustments to
a. Any additional costs you incur. basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
Basis, earlier. Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,b. Any gain you recognize on the ex-
your basis in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis)change. Example. You received an acre of land as a includes any gift tax paid on it. However, your
gift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMV basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at theIf the other party to the exchange assumes of $8,000. The donor's adjusted basis was time it was given to you.your liabilities, treat the debt assumption as $10,000. After you received the property, nomoney you received in the exchange. events occurred to increase or decrease your
Inherited PropertyAllocation of basis. If you receive like-kind basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000,
and unlike properties in the exchange, allocate you will have a $2,000 gain because you must If you inherited property from a decedent whothe basis first to the unlike property, other than use the donor's adjusted basis at the time of the died before 2010, your basis in property youmoney, up to its FMV on the date of the ex- gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you inherit from a decedent is generally one of thechange. The rest is the basis of the like-kind sell the property for $7,000, you will have a following.property. $1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at
the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to • The FMV of the property at the date of theMore information. See Like-Kind Exchanges figure loss. decedent's death.in chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- If the sales price is between $8,000 and • The FMV on the alternate valuation date iftion. $10,000, you have neither gain nor loss. the personal representative for the estate
Business property. If you hold the gift asBasis for depreciation. Special rules apply in elects to use alternate valuation.
business property, your basis for figuring anydetermining and depreciating the basis of • The value under the special-use valuationdepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-MACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex- method for real property used in farmingtions is the same as the donor's adjusted basischange. For information, see What Is the Basis or a closely held business if elected forplus or minus any required adjustments to basisof Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of estate tax purposes.while you hold the property.Publication 946.
• The decedent's adjusted basis in land to
FMV equal to or greater than donor's ad- the extent of the value excluded from theProperty Transferred justed basis. If the FMV of the property is decedent's taxable estate as a qualified
equal to or greater than the donor's adjustedFrom a Spouse conservation easement.
basis, your basis is the donor's adjusted basis at
The basis of property transferred to you or trans- the time you received the gift. Increase your If a federal estate tax return does not have to
ferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is basis by all or part of any gift tax paid, depending be filed, your basis in the inherited property is its
the same as your spouse's adjusted basis. The on the date of the gift, explained later. appraised value at the date of death for state
same rule applies to a transfer by your former Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or inheritance or transmission taxes.
spouse that is incident to divorce. However, for other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de- For more information, see the instructions to
property transferred in trust, adjust your basis pletion, or amortization deductions on business Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-
for any gain recognized by your spouse or for- property, you must increase or decrease your tion-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.
mer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the basis (the donor's adjusted basis) by any re-
liabilities to which the property is subject, are quired adjustments to basis while you held the Property inherited from a decedent who died
more than the adjusted basis of the property property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier. in 2010. If you inherited property from a dece-
transferred.  If you received a gift during the tax year, dent who died in 2010, special rules may apply.
If the property transferred to you is a series increase your basis in the gift (the donor's ad- For more information, see Publication 4895, Tax
E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it Treatment of a Property Acquired From a Dece-
transferor must include in income the interest due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figure dent Dying in 2010.
accrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by a
bond immediately after the transfer is equal to fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the net Community property. In community property
the transferor's basis increased by the interest increase in value of the gift and the denominator states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,
income includible in the transferor's income. For is the amount of the gift. Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and
more information on these bonds, see chapter 7. The net increase in value of the gift is the Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usually
At the time of the transfer, the transferor FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted basis. considered to own half the community property.
must give you the records needed to determine The amount of the gift is its value for gift tax When either spouse dies, the total value of the
Page 98 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 101 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
community property, even the part belonging to figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 average basis. For more information, see Publi-
the surviving spouse, generally becomes the cation 564.(land) − $37,500).
basis of the entire property. For this rule to Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at aapply, at least half the value of the community with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the premium and elect to amortize the premium,property interest must be includible in the dece- FMV of the property at the time of the change to reduce the basis of the bond by the amortizeddent's gross estate, whether or not the estate business or rental use. Then make adjustments premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-must file a return. (increases and decreases) for the period after mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publicationthe change in the property's use, as discussed 550 for more information. Although you cannotExample. You and your spouse owned earlier under Adjusted Basis. deduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, youcommunity property that had a basis of $80,000.
must amortize the premium each year and re-When your spouse died, half the FMV of the Example. Assume the same facts as in the duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedcommunity interest was includible in your previous example, except that you sell the prop- amount.spouse's estate. The FMV of the community erty at a loss after being allowed depreciationinterest was $100,000. The basis of your half of deductions of $37,500. In this case, you would Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-the property after the death of your spouse is start with the FMV on the date of the change to ments. You must increase your basis in an$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basis rental use ($180,000), because it is less than the OID debt instrument by the OID you include inof the other half to your spouse's heirs is also adjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 + income for that instrument. See Original Issue$50,000. $25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce that Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 and PublicationFor more information about community prop- amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc- 1212, Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID)erty, see Publication 555, Community Property. tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 Instruments.
($180,000 − $37,500).
Tax-exempt obligations. OID onProperty Changed From
tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxable.Personal to Business or Stocks and Bonds However, when you dispose of a tax-exempt
obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andRental Use The basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrueis the purchase price plus any costs of purchase,If you hold property for personal use and then OID on the obligation to determine its adjustedsuch as commissions and recording or transferchange it to business use or use it to produce basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis of
fees. If you get stocks or bonds other than byrent, you can begin to depreciate the property at the obligation to determine your gain or loss.
purchase, your basis is usually determined bythe time of the change. To do so, you must figure See chapter 4 of Publication 550.
the FMV or the previous owner's adjusted basis,its basis for depreciation. An example of chang-
as discussed earlier.ing property held for personal use to business or
You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-rental use would be renting out your former
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-personal residence.
ple, if you receive additional stock from
Basis for depreciation. The basis for depre- nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-
ciation is the lesser of the following amounts. duce your basis for each share of stock by divid- 14.
ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by the• The FMV of the property on the date of the number of shares of old and new stock. This rulechange. applies only when the additional stock received
• Your adjusted basis on the date of the Sale of Propertyis identical to the stock held. Also reduce your
change. basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-
tions. They are a return of capital.
Example. Several years ago, you paid ReminderExample. In 2008 you bought 100 shares of$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2009cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen whoyou bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600improvements to the house and claimed a sells property located outside the United States,or $16 a share. In 2010 XYZ declared a 2-for-1$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to you must report all gains and losses from thestock split. You now have 200 shares of stockthe house before changing the property to rental sale of that property on your tax return unless itwith a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with ause last year. Because land is not depreciable, is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youbasis of $8 a share.you include only the cost of the house when reside inside or outside the United States andfiguring the basis for depreciation. Other basis. There are other ways to figure whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from theYour adjusted basis in the house when you the basis of stocks or bonds depending on how payer.changed its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + you acquired them. For detailed information, see$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investmentproperty had an FMV of $180,000, of which Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was for
Introductionthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation on Identifying stocks or bonds sold. If you canthe house is its FMV on the date of the change adequately identify the shares of stock or the This chapter discusses the tax consequences of($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other selling or trading investment property. It explainsbasis ($178,000). basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds. the following.
If you buy and sell securities at various times inSale of property. If you later sell or dispose of • What a sale or trade is.varying quantities and you cannot adequatelyproperty changed to business or rental use, the • Figuring gain or loss.identify the shares you sell, the basis of thebasis you use will depend on whether you are securities you sell is the basis of the securitiesfiguring gain or loss. • Nontaxable trades.you acquired first. For more information about
Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is your • Related party transactions.identifying securities you sell, see Stocks and
adjusted basis in the property when you sell the Bonds under Basis of Investment Property  in • Capital gains or losses.property. chapter 4 of Publication 550.
• Capital assets and noncapital assets.
Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual fundExample. Assume the same facts as in the • Holding period.shares you acquired at various times and pricesprevious example except that you sell the prop-
and left on deposit in an account kept by aerty at a gain after being allowed depreciation • Rollover of gain from publicly traded se-
custodian or agent, you can elect to use andeductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for curities.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other property transactions. Certain trans- replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- Filing a claim for refund. If you do not
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges claim a loss for a worthless security on yourfers of property are not discussed here. They are
under Nontaxable Trades, later. original return for the year it becomes worthless,discussed in other IRS publications. These in-
you can file a claim for a credit or refund due toclude the following.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stock the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amended• Sales of a main home, covered in chapter is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend15. capital gain or loss provisions unless the re- your return for the year the security became
demption is a dividend or other distribution on worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the• Installment sales, covered in Publication
stock. date your original return for that year had to be537, Installment Sales.
filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a• Transactions involving business property, whichever is later. For more information aboutredemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,covered in Publication 544, Sales and filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claimsor other distribution depends on the circum-Other Dispositions of Assets. for Refund in chapter 1.stances in each case. Both direct and indirect
• Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac- ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
tivity, covered in Publication 925, Passive demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: How To FigureActivity and At-Risk Rules.
• The redemption is not essentially Gain or Loss
equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofpenses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), • There is a substantially disproportionate property by comparing the amount you realizeprovides a more detailed discussion about sales redemption of stock, with the adjusted basis of the property.and trades of investment property. Publication
• There is a complete redemption of all the550 includes information about the rules cover- Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale orstock of the corporation owned by theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section trade is more than the adjusted basis of theshareholder, or1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
tures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis- • The redemption is a distribution in partial Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youcusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
difference is a loss.Useful Items Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-
Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-You may want to see: demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their
erty is your original cost or other original basismaturity is generally treated as a sale or trade.
properly adjusted (increased or decreased) forPublication In addition, a significant modification of a
certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-bond is treated as a trade of the original bond for❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses tion about determining the adjusted basis ofa new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-
property.tion 1.1001-3.Form (and Instructions)
Amount realized. The amount you realize❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a from a sale or trade of property is everything youand Losses dominant shareholder who retains ownership of receive for the property minus your expenses ofmore than half of the corporation's voting shares❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges sale (such as redemption fees, sales commis-is treated as a contribution to capital rather than sions, sales charges, or exit fees). Amount real-as an immediate loss deductible from taxable ized includes the money you receive plus the fairincome. The surrendering shareholder must re- market value of any property or services youallocate his or her basis in the surrendered receive. If you received a note or other debtshares to the shares he or she retains. instrument for the property, see How To FigureSales and Trades
Gain or Loss in chapter 4 of Publication 550 toWorthless securities. Stocks, stock rights,If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or figure the amount realized.and bonds (other than those held for sale by acertain commodities through a broker during the If you finance the buyer's purchase of yoursecurities dealer) that became completelyyear, you should receive, for each sale, a Form property and the debt instrument does not pro-worthless during the tax year are treated as1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex- vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedthough they were sold on the last day of the taxchange Transactions, or an equivalent state- interest that you must report as ordinary incomeyear. This affects whether your capital loss isment from the broker. You should receive the will reduce the amount realized from the sale.long term or short term. See Holding Period ,statement by March 1 of the next year. It will For more information, see Publication 537.later.show the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS Worthless securities also include securities Fair market value. Fair market value is thewill also get a copy of Form 1099-B from the that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To price at which the property would change handsbroker. abandon a security, you must permanently sur- between a buyer and a seller, neither beingUse Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- render and relinquish all rights in the security forced to buy or sell and both having reasonablement received from your broker) to complete and receive no consideration in exchange for it. knowledge of all the relevant facts.Schedule D (Form 1040). All the facts and circumstances determine
whether the transaction is properly character- Example. You trade A Company stock with
ized as an abandonment or other type of trans- an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B CompanyWhat Is a Sale or Trade?
action, such as an actual sale or exchange, stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which
contribution to capital, dividend, or gift. is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000This section explains what is a sale or trade. It
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make ($10,000 − $7,000).also explains certain transactions and events
payments on a negotiable promissory note thatthat are treated as sales or trades. Debt paid off. A debt against the property,you issued for stock that became worthless, youA sale is generally a transfer of property for or against you, that is paid off as a part of thecan deduct these payments as losses in themoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise to transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer,years you actually make the payments. Do notpay money. must be included in the amount realized. This isdeduct them in the year the stock became worth-A trade is a transfer of property for other true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-less.property or services and may be taxed in the ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
same way as a sale. How to report loss. Report worthless se- trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
curities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or loan, the amount you realize generally includes
Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction line 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), the full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property enter ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your loss even if the amount of the note is more than the
for cash and immediately buy similar property to in parentheses in column (f). fair market value of the property.
Page 100 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 103 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You sell stock that you had States and personal property used same corporation without having a recognized
pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. predominantly outside the United States gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer are not like property. stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in holder and the corporation.5. The property to be received must be identi-cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 fied in writing within 45 days after the date Convertible stocks and bonds. You gen-+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 − you transfer the property given up in the erally will not have a recognized gain or loss if$6,000). trade. you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock
Payment of cash. If you trade property and into common stock of the same corporation ac-6. The property to be received must be re-cash for other property, the amount you realize cording to a conversion privilege in the terms ofceived by the earlier of:is the fair market value of the property you re- the bond or the preferred stock certificate.
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- a. The 180th day after the date on which Property for stock of a controlled corpora-tracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis you transfer the property given up in the tion. If you transfer property to a corporationof the property you trade in from the amount you trade, or solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a and immediately after the trade you are in con-b. The due date, including extensions, forgain. If the result is a negative number, it is a trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will notyour tax return for the year in which theloss. recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothtransfer of the property given up occurs.
to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if thefor figuring gain that is different from the basis If you trade property with a related party in a
corporation is an investment company.used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
neither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-See Related Party Transactions , later in this
Cost in chapter 13. ration, you or your group of transferors mustchapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544
own, immediately after the exchange, at leastfor more information on exchanges of business
80% of the total combined voting power of allproperty and special rules for exchanges usingNontaxable Trades classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%qualified intermediaries or involving multiple
of the outstanding shares of each class of non-properties.This section discusses trades that generally do
voting stock of the corporation.not result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receive If this provision applies to you, you may haveFor more information on nontaxable trades, see money or unlike property in addition to like prop- to attach to your return a complete statement ofchapter 1 of Publication 544. erty, and the above six conditions are met, you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,
Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business have a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed on see Regulations section 1.351-3.
or investment property for other business or any gain you realize, but only up to the amount
Additional information. For more informa-investment property of a like kind, you do not of the money and the fair market value of the
tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradespay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you unlike property you receive. You cannot deduct
in chapter 4 of Publication 550.sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be a loss.
nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the Like property and unlike property trans- Insurance policies and annuities. You willfollowing conditions. ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- not have a recognized gain or loss if the insured
tion to the like property, you must recognize gain or annuitant is the same under both contracts1. The property must be business or invest-
or loss on the unlike property you give up. The and you trade:ment property. You must hold both the
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-property you trade and the property you • A life insurance contract for another lifejusted basis of the unlike property and its fairreceive for productive use in your trade or insurance contract or for an endowment ormarket value.business or for investment. Neither prop- annuity contract or for a qualifiederty may be property used for personal long-term care insurance contract,Like property and money transferred. Ifpurposes, such as your home or family conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax- • An endowment contract for another en-car. able trade even if you pay money in addition to dowment contract that provides for regularthe like property.2. The property must not be held primarily for payments beginning at a date no latersale. The property you trade and the prop- than the beginning date under the old con-Basis of property received. To figure the ba-erty you receive must not be property you tract or for an annuity contract or for asis of the property received, see Nontaxablesell to customers, such as merchandise. qualified long-term insurance contract,Exchanges in chapter 13.
3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, • An annuity contract for annuity contract orHow to report. You must report the trade ofnotes, choses in action, certificates of trust for a qualified long-term care insurancelike property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-or beneficial interest, or other securities or contract, ornized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-
Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797, • A qualified long-term care insurance con-cluding partnership interests. However,
Sales of Business Property, whichever applies. tract for a qualified long-term care insur-see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser-
For information on using Form 4797, see ance contract.voir, or irrigation company stock, in chapter
chapter 4 of Publication 544.4 of Publication 550 for an exception. Also,
You also may not have to recognize gain oryou can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- Corporate stocks. The following trades of loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuityrate stocks under a different rule, as dis- corporate stocks generally do not result in a contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-cussed later. taxable gain or a deductible loss. nue Ruling 2003-76 in Internal Revenue Bulletin4. There must be a trade of like property. The 2003-33 and Revenue Procedure 2008-24 inCorporate reorganizations. In some in-trade of real estate for real estate, or per- Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008-13. Revenuestances, a company will give you common stocksonal property for similar personal prop- Ruling 2003-76 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonerty, is a trade of like property. The trade 2003-33_IRB/ar11.html . Revenue Procedurestock, or stock in one corporation for stock inof an apartment house for a store building, 2008-24 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/another corporation. If this is a result of aor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a 2008-13_IRB/ar13.html.merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledtrade of like property. The trade of a piece corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor- Exchanges of contracts not included in thisof machinery for a store building is not a porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani- list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-trade of like property. Real property lo- zation, you do not recognize gain or loss. ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-cated in the United States and real prop- tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.erty located outside the United States are Stock for stock of the same corporation.
not like property. Also, personal property You can exchange common stock for common Demutualization of life insurance compa-
used predominantly within the United stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the nies. If you received stock in exchange for
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 101

Page 104 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your equity interest as a policyholder or an annu- year in which the later disposition occurs. See of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you
itant, you generally will not have a recognized Publication 550, chapter 4 for exceptions. must figure the gain or loss separately for each
gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur- block of stock or piece of property. The gain onLosses on sales or trades of property. Youance Companies in Publication 550. each item may be taxable. However, you cannotcannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotproperty, other than a distribution in completeU.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can trade reduce gains from the sales of any of theseliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction iscertain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for items by losses on the sales of any of the otherdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-other issues designated by the Secretary of the items.ing related parties.Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on the
Indirect transactions. You cannot deducttrade. See the discussion in chapter 1 of Publi- • Members of your family. This includes only your loss on the sale of stock through yourcation 550 for more information. your brothers and sisters, half-brothers broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-
party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-Transfers Between does not apply to a trade between related par-scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
Spouses ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
• A partnership in which you directly or indi- dental and is not prearranged.
rectly own more than 50% of the capitalGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
Constructive ownership of stock. In de-interest or the profits interest. transfer of property from an individual to (or in
termining whether a person directly or indirectlytrust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to • A corporation in which you directly or indi- owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition rectly own more than 50% in value of the tion, the following rules apply.rule does not apply in the following situations. outstanding stock. (See Constructive own-
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byership of stock, later.)• The recipient spouse or former spouse is
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trusta nonresident alien. • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or- is considered owned proportionately by or for itsganization directly or indirectly controlled,• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.in any manner or by any method, by yoube recognized to the extent the amount of
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownor by a member of your family, whether orthe liabilities assumed by the trust, plus
not this control is legally enforceable. the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisany liabilities on the property, exceed the
or her family. Family includes only brothers andadjusted basis of the property.
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,For other situations, see Publication 550, chap- property is not deductible if the transaction is ancestors, and lineal descendants.ter 4. directly or indirectly between the following re- Rule 3. An individual owning, other than bylated parties.Any transfer of property to a spouse or former applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation isspouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary considered to own the stock directly or indirectlytreated by the recipient as a gift and is not and beneficiary, of any trust. owned by or for his or her partner.considered a sale or exchange. The recipient's
• Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or thebasis in the property will be the same as the Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock
fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentadjusted basis of the giver immediately before constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is
trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofthe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies treated as actually owned by that person. But
both trusts. whether the adjusted basis of the transferred stock constructively owned by an individual
property is less than, equal to, or greater than under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whicheither its fair market value at the time of transfer that individual for again applying either rule 2 ormore than 50% in value of the outstandingor any consideration paid by the recipient. This rule 3 to make another person the constructivestock is directly or indirectly owned by orrule applies for purposes of determining loss as owner of the stock.for the trust, or by or for the grantor of thewell as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer trust.in trust increases the basis. Property received from a related party. If• A corporation and a partnership if theA transfer of property is incident to a divorce you sell or trade at a gain property you acquiredsame persons own more than 50% inif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date from a related party, you recognize the gain onlyvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is to the extent it is more than the loss previouslyporation and more than 50% of the capitalrelated to the ending of the marriage. disallowed to the related party. This rule appliesinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-
only if you are the original transferee and younership.
Related Party Transactions acquired the property by purchase or exchange.
• Two S corporations if the same persons This rule does not apply if the related party's loss
own more than 50% in value of the out-Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- was disallowed because of the wash sale rulesstanding stock of each corporation. erty between related parties. described in chapter 4 of Publication 550 under
Wash Sales.• Two corporations, one of which is an SGain on sale or trade of depreciable prop- corporation, if the same persons own If you sell or trade at a loss property youerty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop- more than 50% in value of the outstanding acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-erty to a related party may be ordinary income, stock of each corporation. nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedrather than capital gain, if the property can be
party.depreciated by the party receiving it. See chap- • An executor and a beneficiary of an estate
ter 3 of Publication 544 for more information. (except in the case of a sale or trade to Example 1. Your brother sells you stock forsatisfy a pecuniary bequest). 
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brotherLike-kind exchanges. Generally, if you trade • Two corporations that are members of the cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellbusiness or investment property for other busi- same controlled group. (Under certain the same stock to an unrelated party forness or investment property of a like kind, no conditions, however, these losses are not $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- disallowed but must be deferred.) able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus thechanges earlier under Nontaxable Trades.
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).This rule also applies to trades of property • Two partnerships if the same persons
between related parties, defined next under own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theLosses on sales or trades of property. However, of the capital interests or the profit inter-
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-if either you or the related party disposes of the ests in both partnerships. 
nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minuslike property within 2 years after the trade, you
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasboth must report any gain or loss not recognized Multiple property sales or trades. If you
not allowed to your brother.on the original trade on your return filed for the sell or trade to a related party a number of blocks
Page 102 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 105 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Real property used in your trade or busi- Capital Asset Treatment for
ness. Self-Created Musical WorksCapital Gains
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic You can elect to treat musical compositions andcomposition, a letter or memorandum, orand Losses copyrights in musical works as capital assetssimilar property that is: when you sell or exchange them if:This section discusses the tax treatment of
a. Created by your personal efforts,gains and losses from different types of invest- • Your personal efforts created the property,
orment transactions.    b. Prepared or produced for you (in the
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- • You acquired the property under circum-lar property), orCharacter of gain or loss. You need to clas- stances (for example, by gift) entitling you
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or to the basis of the person who created thec. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-capital gains or losses. You then need to classify property or for whom it was prepared orample, by gift) entitling you to the basisyour capital gains and losses as either short produced.of the person who created the propertyterm or long term. If you have long-term gains or for whom it was prepared or pro-and losses, you must identify your 28% rate You must make a separate election for eachduced.
gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, musical composition (or copyright in a musicalFor an exception to this rule, see Capitalyou must also identify any unrecaptured section work) sold or exchanged during the tax year.Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musical1250 gain. You must make the election on or before the dueWorks later. date (including extensions) of the income taxThe correct classification and identification
return for the tax year of the sale or exchange.helps you figure the limit on capital losses and 5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
You must make the election on Schedule Dthe correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi- the ordinary course of a trade or business
(Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange astal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16. for services rendered or from the sale of
the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord-property described in (1).
ing to Schedule D and its instructions.Capital or Ordinary 6. U.S. Government publications that you re- You can revoke the election if you have IRSceived from the government free or for less approval. To get IRS approval, you must submitGain or Loss than the normal sales price, or that you a request for a letter ruling under the appropriateacquired under circumstances entitling youIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev.to the basis of someone who received thefrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gain Proc. 2009-1, 2009-1 I.R.B. 1, available at www.publications free or for less than the nor-or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on irs.gov/irb/2009-01_IRB/ar06.html . Alterna-mal sales price.the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of tively, you are granted an automatic 6-month
extension from the due date of your income taxa capital asset (defined next) results in a capital 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-
return (excluding extensions) to revoke the elec-gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset struments held by commodities derivatives
tion, provided you timely file your income taxgenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- dealers.
return, and within this 6-month extension period,pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on 8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans- you file Form 1040X that treats the sale or ex-a sale or trade of property used in a trade or action is clearly identified as a hedging change as the sale or exchange of property thatbusiness may be treated as either capital or transaction before the close of the day on is not a capital asset.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In which it was acquired, originated, or en-some situations, part of your gain or loss may be tered into.a capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi-
Discounted Debt Instruments9. Supplies of a type you regularly use ornary gain or loss.
consume in the ordinary course of your
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,trade or business.Capital Assets and or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument
originally issued at a discount or bought at aNoncapital Assets discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
Investment Property plained in the following discussions.For the most part, everything you own and use
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment Short-term government obligations. TreatInvestment property is a capital asset. Any gainis a capital asset. Some examples are: gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capital
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-gain or loss.• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratablecount,
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. share of the acquisition discount. This treatment
• A house owned and used by you and your These are capital assets except when they are applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date
family, held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you not more than 1 year from the date of issue.
have from their sale or trade generally is a capi- Acquisition discount is the stated redemption• Household furnishings,
tal gain or loss. price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-
• A car used for pleasure or commuting, tion.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these However, do not treat these gains as income• Coin or stamp collections, (including stock received as a dividend) are cap- to the extent you previously included the dis-
• Gems and jewelry, and ital assets except when held for sale by a securi- count in income. See Discount on Short-Term
ties dealer. However, if you own small business Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.• Gold, silver, or any other metal. stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-
Short-term nongovernment obligations.ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-vestment Company Stock  in chapter 4 ofcept the following noncapital assets. gations as ordinary income up to your ratablePublication 550.
share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-1. Property held mainly for sale to customers ment applies to obligations with a fixed maturityor property that will physically become a date of not more than 1 year from the date ofPersonal Use Propertypart of the merchandise for sale to custom- issue.ers. For an exception, see Capital Asset Property held for personal use only, rather than However, to the extent you previously in-Treatment for Self-Created Musical Works for investment, is a capital asset, and you must cluded the discount in income, you do not havelater. report a gain from its sale as a capital gain. to include it in income again. See Discount on
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or However, you cannot deduct a loss from selling Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-
business, even if fully depreciated. personal use property. tion 550.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 103

Page 106 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax-exempt state and local government Long-term debt instruments issued after • Ordinary loss.
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-bonds. If these bonds were originally issued • Casualty loss.ernment instrument). If you hold one of theseat a discount before September 4, 1982, or you
• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitaldebt instruments, you must include a part of OIDacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your
loss).in your gross income each year you own thepart of OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure
instrument. Your basis in that debt instrument isyour gain or loss on the sale or trade of these
increased by the amount of OID that you havebonds, reduce the amount realized by your part For more information, see Deposit in Insolventincluded in your gross income. See Original Is-of OID. or Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 ofsue Discount (OID) in chapter 7 for informationIf the bonds were issued after September 3, Publication 550.about OID that you must report on your tax1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- return.crease the adjusted basis by your part of OID to Sale of AnnuityIf you sell or trade the debt instrument beforefigure gain or loss. For more information on the maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifbasis of these bonds, see Discounted Debt In- The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityat the time the instrument was originally issuedstruments in chapter 4 of Publication 550. contract before its maturity date that is based onthere was an intention to call it before its matur- interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryAny gain from market discount is usually ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the income.taxable on disposition or redemption of extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountstax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds of OID previously includible in your income. Inbefore May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis- this case, the rest of the gain is capital gain. Losses on Section 1244 (Smallcount is capital gain. If you bought the bonds
Market discount bonds. If the debt instru- Business) Stockafter April 30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income.
ment has market discount and you chose toYou figure the market discount by sub-  You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thaninclude the discount in income as it accrued,tracting the price you paid for the bond from the as a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, orincrease your basis in the debt instrument by thesum of the original issue price of the bond and worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theaccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onthe amount of accumulated OID from the date of loss on Form 4797, line 10.its disposition. If you did not choose to includeissue that represented interest to any earlier Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalthe discount in income as it accrued, you mustholders. For more information, see Market Dis- gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.report gain as ordinary interest income up to thecount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. Report the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).instrument's accrued market discount. The restA loss on the sale or other disposition of a See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discounttax-exempt state or local government bond is Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.deductible as a capital loss. A different rule applies to market discount
bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur-Redeemed before maturity. If a state or
Losses on Small Businesschased by you before May 1, 1993. See Marketlocal bond issued before June 9, 1980, is re-
discount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru- Investment Company Stockdeemed before it matures, the OID is not taxable
ments in chapter 4 of Publication 550.to you.
See Losses on Small Business InvestmentIf a state or local bond issued after June 8, Retirement of debt instrument. Any Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of amount you receive on the retirement of a debt
OID earned while you hold the bond is not tax- instrument is treated in the same way as if you
Holding Periodable to you. However, you must report the had sold or traded that instrument.
unearned part of OID as a capital gain. Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation If you sold or traded investment property, you
of an individual issued with OID after March 1, must determine your holding period for the prop-Example. On July 1, 1999, the date of is- 1984, you generally must include the OID in your erty. Your holding period determines whethersue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond income currently, and your gain or loss on its any capital gain or loss was a short-term orfor $800. The face amount of the bond was sale or retirement is generally capital gain or long-term capital gain or loss.$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time loss. An exception to this treatment applies if thethe bond was issued, the issuer had no intention obligation is a loan between individuals and all Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest-of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was the following requirements are met. ment property more than 1 year, any capital gaincallable at its face amount beginning 10 years or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you• The lender is not in the business of lend-after the issue date. hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gaining money.The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.11 years (July 1, 2010) for its face amount of • The amount of the loan, plus the amount To determine how long you held the invest-$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 ment property, begin counting on the date afterOID earned during the time you held the bond, or less. the day you acquired the property. The day you$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual disposed of the property is part of your holding• Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-interest also is not taxable. However, you must period.cipal purposes of the loan.report the unearned part of OID ($127) as a
capital gain. Example. If you bought investment propertyIf the exception applies, or the obligation was on February 5, 2009, and sold it on February 5,Long-term debt instruments issued after issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include 2010, your holding period is not more than 11954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July the OID in your income currently. When you sell year and you have a short-term capital gain or2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2010, yoursell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these that is not more than your accrued share of OID holding period is more than 1 year and you willdebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not at that time is ordinary income. The rest of the have a long-term capital gain or loss.more than your ratable share of the OID at the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the sale
time of the sale or redemption is ordinary in- or redemption is capital loss. Securities traded on established market.come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, For securities traded on an established securi-however, there was an intention to call the debt ties market, your holding period begins the dayinstrument before maturity, all of your gain that is Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt after the trade date you bought the securities,not more than the entire OID is treated as ordi- Financial Institution and ends on the trade date you sold them.nary income at the time of the sale. This treat-
ment of taxable gain also applies to corporate If you lose money you have on deposit in a bank, Do not confuse the trade date with the
instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a credit union, or other financial institution that settlement date, which is the date by
written commitment that was binding on May 27, becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may be able which the stock must be delivered and
CAUTION
!
1969, and at all times thereafter. to deduct your loss in one of three ways. payment must be made.
Page 104 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 107 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are a cash method, calendar actual contract of sale. The holding period of the Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- seller cannot end before that time. dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
cember 29, 2010. According to the rules of the an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
Real property repossessed. If you sell realstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-property but keep a security interest in it, andof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on ness bad debts as short-term capital losses onthen later repossess the property under theJanuary 4, 2011. You received payment of the Schedule D (Form 1040).terms of the sales contract, your holding periodsales price on that same day. Report your gain On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the namefor a later sale includes the period you held theon your 2010 return, even though you received of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-property before the original sale and the periodthe payment in 2011. The gain is long term or umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt inafter the repossession. Your holding periodshort term depending on whether you held the parentheses in column (f). Use a separate linedoes not include the time between the originalstock more than 1 year. Your holding period for each bad debt.sale and the repossession. That is, it does notended on December 29. If you had sold the For each bad debt, attach a statement toinclude the period during which the first buyerstock at a loss, you would also report it on your your return that contains:held the property.2010 return.
• A description of the debt, including theU.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding Stock dividends. The holding period for stock amount, and the date it became due,period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at you received as a taxable stock dividend begins • The name of the debtor, and any businessauction on the basis of yield starts the day after on the date of distribution. or family relationship between you and thethe Secretary of the Treasury, through news The holding period for new stock you re- debtor,releases, gives notification of acceptance to ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onsuccessful bidders. The holding period of U.S. the same day as the holding period of the old • The efforts you made to collect the debt,Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in anding on a subscription basis at a specified yield a ªspin-off,º which is a distribution of stock or • Why you decided the debt was worthless.starts the day after the subscription is submitted. securities in a controlled corporation. For example, you could show that the bor-Automatic investment service. In determin- rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding perioding your holding period for shares bought by the gal action to collect would probably notfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the samebank or other agent, full shares are considered result in payment of any part of the debt.day as the holding period of the underlyingbought first and any fractional shares are con- stock. The holding period for stock acquiredsidered bought last. Your holding period starts Filing a claim for refund.  If you do notthrough the exercise of stock rights begins onon the day after the bank's purchase date. If a deduct a bad debt on your original return for thethe date the right was exercised.share was bought over more than one purchase year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimdate, your holding period for that share is a split for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To doholding period. A part of the share is considered Nonbusiness Bad Debts this, use Form 1040X to amend your return forto have been bought on each date that stock the year the debt became worthless. You mustwas bought by the bank with the proceeds of If someone owes you money that you cannot file it within 7 years from the date your originalavailable funds. collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearsdeduct the amount owed to you when you figure from the date you paid the tax, whichever isNontaxable trades. If you acquire investment your tax for the year the debt becomes worth- later. For more information about filing a claim,property in a trade for other investment property less. see Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inand your basis for the new property is deter- Generally, nonbusiness bad debts are bad chapter 1.mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the debts that did not come from operating yourold property, your holding period for the new Additional information. For more informa-trade or business, and are deductible asproperty begins on the day following the date tion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publicationshort-term capital losses. To be deductible, non-you acquired the old property. 550. For information on business bad debts, seebusiness bad debts must be totally worthless.
chapter 10 of Publication 535, Business Ex-You cannot deduct a partly worthless nonbusi-Property received as a gift. If you receive a
penses.ness debt.gift of property and your basis is determined by
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period
Genuine debt required. A debt must be gen-is considered to have started on the same day Wash Salesuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine ifthe donor's holding period started.
it arises from a debtor-creditor relationshipIf your basis is determined by the fair market You cannot deduct losses from sales or trades
based on a valid and enforceable obligation tovalue of the property, your holding period starts of stock or securities in a wash sale.
repay a fixed or determinable sum of money.on the day after the date of the gift. A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysInherited property before 2010. If you inher- Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a bad before or after the sale you:ited investment property from a decedent who debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is, you
died before 2010, your capital gain or loss on must have already included the amount in your 1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-
any later disposition of that property is long-term income or loaned out your cash. For example, ties,
capital gain or loss. This is true regardless of you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-how long you actually held the property. court-ordered child support not paid to you by curities in a fully taxable trade,your former spouse. If you are a cash methodInherited property after 2009. If you inherit taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generally 3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-investment property from a decedent who died cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid stantially identical stock or securities, orafter 2009, use Publication 4895, Tax Treatment salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,of Property Acquired From a Decedent Dying in 4. Acquire substantially identical stock forand similar items.2010, to determine your holding period. your individual retirement account (IRA) or
Roth IRA.When deductible. You can take a bad debtReal property bought. To figure how long
deduction only in the year the debt becomesyou have held real property bought under an If your loss was disallowed because of the
worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt isunconditional contract, begin counting on the wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the
due to determine whether it is worthless. A debtday after you received title to it or on the day cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)
becomes worthless when there is no longer anyafter you took possession of it and assumed the above). The result is your basis in the new stock
chance that the amount owed will be paid.burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever or securities. This adjustment postpones the
happened first. However, taking delivery or pos- It is not necessary to go to court if you can loss deduction until the disposition of the new
session of real property under an option agree- show that a judgment from the court would be stock or securities. Your holding period for the
ment is not enough to start the holding period. uncollectible. You must only show that you have new stock or securities includes the holding pe-
The holding period cannot start until there is an taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. riod of the stock or securities sold.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 105

Page 108 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see Wash Sales , in If you have a loss on the sale, you cannot
deduct it on your return. However, you may needchapter 4 of Publication 550.
to report it. See Reporting the Sale, later.
15. The following are main topics in this chapter.Rollover of Gain From
• Figuring gain or loss.Publicly Traded Securities
• Basis.You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain Selling Your • Excluding the gain.gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.
This means that if you buy certain replacement • Ownership and use tests.Homeproperty and make the choice described in this
• Reporting the sale.section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis Other topics include the following.
of the replacement property as described in Ba- • Business use or rental of home.What's Newsis of replacement property , later. This
postpones your gain until the year you dispose • Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy.
of the replacement property. First-time homebuyer credit extended. You
generally cannot claim the credit for a home youYou qualify to make this choice if you meet
Useful Itemsbought after April 30, 2010. However, you mayall the following tests.
You may want to see:be able to claim the credit if you entered into a• You sell publicly traded securities at a written binding contract before May 1, 2010, togain. Publicly traded securities are securi- Publicationbuy the home before July 1, 2010, and actuallyties traded on an established securities bought the home before October 1, 2010. Formarket. ❏ 523 Selling Your Homedetails, see chapter 37.
• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. ❏ 530 Tax Information for HomeownersSpecial rules for certain qualified officials on
• During the 60-day period beginning on the ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsextended duty. The first-time homebuyer
date of the sale, you buy replacement credit is extended until July 1, 2011, for individu-
property. This replacement property must Form (and Instructions)als on qualified official extended duty service (as
be either common stock of, or a partner- defined by section 121(d)(9)(C)(i)) outside the
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainsship interest in a specialized small busi- United States for at least 90 days. You must
and Lossesness investment company (SSBIC). This have entered into a written binding contract
is any partnership or corporation licensed before May 1, 2011, and actually bought the ❏ 982 Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to
by the Small Business Administration home before July 1, 2011. Discharge of Indebtedness (and
under section 301(d) of the Small Busi- Section 1082 Basis Adjustments)
ness Investment Act of 1958, as in effect
❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgageon May 13, 1993.
Subsidy
Reminders
Amount of gain recognized. If you make the
choice described in this section, you must rec- Home sold with undeducted points. If youognize gain only up to the following amount. have not deducted all the points you paid to
Main Homesecure a mortgage on your old home, you may• The amount realized on the sale, minus
be able to deduct the remaining points in the• The cost of any common stock or partner- This section explains the term ªmain home.ºyear of the sale. See Mortgage ending earlyship interest in an SSBIC that you bought Usually, the home you live in most of the time isunder Points in chapter 23.during the 60-day period beginning on the your main home and can be a:
date of sale (and did not previously take Recapturing the first-time homebuyer credit. • House,into account on an earlier sale of publicly If you claimed the first-time homebuyer credit in
traded securities). 2008, and you sold the home or the home • Houseboat,
stopped being your main home in 2010, you • Mobile home,generally must repay the credit. You repay theIf this amount is less than the amount of your credit by including it as additional tax on the • Cooperative apartment, orgain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, return for the year your home stops being yoursubject to the limit described next. If this amount • Condominium.main home. For details, see chapter 37.is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
you must recognize the full amount of your gain. To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-
ter, you in most cases must have owned andLimit on gain postponed. The amount of lived in the property as your main home for atgain you can postpone each year is limited to the least 2 years during the 5-year period ending onIntroductionsmaller of: the date of sale.This chapter explains the tax rules that apply• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and when you sell your main home. In most cases,file a separate return), or Land. If you sell the land on which your mainyour main home is the one in which you live home is located, but not the house itself, you• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married most of the time. cannot exclude any gain you have from the saleand file a separate return), minus the If you sold your main home in 2010, you may of the land. However, if you sell vacant landamount of gain you postponed for all ear- be able to exclude from income any gain up to a used as part of your main home and that islier years. limit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return in adjacent to it, you may be able to exclude the
most cases). See Excluding the Gain , later. If gain from the sale under certain circumstances.
you can exclude all the gain, you do not need toBasis of replacement property. You must See Vacant land under Main Home in Publica-
report the sale on your tax return.subtract the amount of postponed gain from the tion 523 for more information.
basis of your replacement property. If you have gain that cannot be excluded, it is
taxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). Example. You buy a piece of land and move
How to report and postpone gain.  See You may also have to complete Form 4797, your main home to it. Then you sell the land on
chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how to Sales of Business Property. See Reporting the which your main home was located. This sale is
report and postpone the gain. Sale, later. not considered a sale of your main home, and
Page 106 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 109 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you cannot exclude any gain on the sale of the (gross proceeds) should show the total amount Dispositions Other Thanland. you received for your home.
SalesHowever, box 2 will not include the fair mar-More than one home. If you have more than ket value of any services or property other thanone home, you can exclude gain only from the Some special rules apply to other dispositions ofcash or notes you received or will receive. In-sale of your main home. You must include in your main home.stead, box 4 will be checked to indicate yourincome gain from the sale of any other home. If receipt or expected receipt of these items. Foreclosure or repossession. If your homeyou have two homes and live in both of them,
was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have aIf you can exclude the entire gain, the personyour main home is ordinarily the one you live in
disposition.responsible for closing the sale in most casesmost of the time.
In most cases, you figure the gain or losswill not have to report it on Form 1099-S. If you
from the disposition in the same way as gain orExample 1. You own and live in a house in do not receive Form 1099-S, use sale docu-
loss from a sale. But the selling price of yourthe city. You also own a beach house you use ments and other records to figure the total
home used to figure the amount of your gain orduring summer months. The house in the city is amount you received for your home.
loss depends, in part, on whether you wereyour main home.
personally liable for repaying the debt secured
Amount Realized by the home and whether the debt is qualifiedExample 2. You own a house, but you live in
principal residence indebtedness. See Publica-another house that you rent. The rented house is The amount realized is the selling price minus tion 523 for more information.your main home. selling expenses.
Form 1099-A and Form 1099-C. Generally,Property used partly as your main home. If you will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition oryou use only part of the property as your main Selling expenses. Selling expenses include: Abandonment of Secured Property, from yourhome, the rules discussed in this chapter apply lender if your home is transferred in a foreclo-• Commissions,only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of sure. This form will have the information youthe property. For details, see Business Use or • Advertising fees, need to determine the amount of your gain orRental of Home, later. loss and any ordinary income from cancellation• Legal fees, and
of debt that is not a discharge of qualified princi-• Loan charges paid by the seller, such as pal residence indebtedness. If your debt is can-
loan placement fees or ªpoints.º celed, you may receive Form 1099-C,
Figuring Gain or Loss Cancellation of Debt.
Adjusted Basis Discharges of qualified principal residenceTo figure the gain or loss on the sale of your
indebtedness. You may be able to excludemain home, you must know the selling price, the While you owned your home, you may have from gross income a discharge of qualified prin-amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub- made adjustments (increases or decreases) to cipal residence indebtedness. This exclusiontract the adjusted basis from the amount real-
the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter- applies to discharges made after 2006 andized to get your gain or loss.
mined before you can figure gain or loss on the before 2013. If you choose to exclude this in-
sale of your home. For information on how to come, you must reduce (but not below zero) theSelling price
figure your home's adjusted basis, see Deter-− Selling expenses basis of the principal residence by the amount
mining Basis, later. excluded from your gross income.Amount realized File Form 982 with your tax return. See the
form's instructions for detailed information.Amount of Gain or LossAmount realized
− Adjusted basis Principal residence. Your principal resi-
To figure the amount of gain or loss, compare dence is the home where you ordinarily live mostGain or loss the amount realized to the adjusted basis. of the time. You can have only one principal
residence at any one time. See Main Home ,
earlier.Gain on sale. If the amount realized is moreSelling Price
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain Qualified principal residence indebted-
The selling price is the total amount you receive and, except for any part you can exclude, in ness. This indebtedness is a mortgage you
for your home. It includes money, all notes, most cases is taxable. took out to buy, build, or substantially improve
mortgages, or other debts assumed by the your principal residence. It also must be secured
buyer as part of the sale, and the fair market by your principal residence, and it cannot beLoss on sale. If the amount realized is lessvalue of any other property or any services you more than the cost of your principal residencethan the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss.receive. plus improvements.A loss on the sale of your main home cannot be
deducted. Amount eligible for the exclusion. ThePayment by employer. You may have to sell
exclusion applies only to debt discharged afteryour home because of a job transfer. If your
2006 and before 2013. The maximum amountemployer pays you for a loss on the sale or for Jointly owned home. If you and your spouse you can treat as qualified principal residenceyour selling expenses, do not include the pay- sell your jointly owned home and file a joint indebtedness is $2 million ($1 million if marriedment as part of the selling price. Your employer return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax- filing separately). You cannot exclude fromwill include it as wages in box 1 of your Form payer. gross income discharge of qualified principalW-2, and you will include it in your income on
residence indebtedness if the discharge was forSeparate returns. If you file separate re-Form 1040, line 7, or on Form 1040NR, line 8.
services performed for the lender or on accountturns, each of you must figure your own gain or
Option to buy. If you grant an option to buy of any other factor not directly related to a de-loss according to your ownership interest in the
your home and the option is exercised, add the cline in the value of your residence or to yourhome. Your ownership interest is determined by
amount you receive for the option to the selling financial condition.state law.
price of your home. If the option is not exercised, Joint owners not married. If you and a Abandonment. If you abandon your home,you must report the amount as ordinary income
joint owner other than your spouse sell your you may have ordinary income. If the aban-in the year the option expires. Report this
jointly owned home, each of you must figure doned home secures a debt for which you areamount on Form 1040, line 21, or on Form
your own gain or loss according to your owner- personally liable and the debt is canceled, you1040NR, line 21.
ship interest in the home. Each of you applies have ordinary income equal to the amount of the
the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ-Form 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S, canceled debt. See Publication 523 for more
ual basis.Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2 information.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 107

Page 110 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trading (exchanging) homes. If you trade Settlement fees or closing costs. When you property, such as a houseboat used as
your old home for another home, treat the trade bought your home, you may have paid settle- your home or a mobile home.
as a sale and a purchase. ment fees or closing costs in addition to the • Deductible casualty losses.contract price of the property. You can include in
Example. You owned and lived in a home your basis some of the settlement fees and • Insurance payments you received or ex-
with an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate closing costs you paid for buying the home, but pect to receive for casualty losses.
dealer accepted your old home as a trade-in and not the fees and costs for getting a mortgage • Payments you received for granting anallowed you $50,000 toward a new home priced loan. A fee paid for buying the home is any fee easement or right-of-way.at $80,000. This is treated as a sale of your old you would have had to pay even if you paid cash
home for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 ($50,000 for the home (that is, without the need for financ- • Depreciation allowed or allowable if you
± $41,000). ing). used your home for business or rental pur-
If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 and Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement fees poses.
assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 on and closing costs that you can include in the • Residential energy credit (generally al-your old home, your sales price would still be basis of property, including your home. It also lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimed$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus the lists some settlement costs that cannot be in- for the cost of energy improvements that$23,000 mortgage assumed). cluded in basis. you added to the basis of your home.Also see Publication 523 for additional items
Transfer to spouse. If you transfer your home and a discussion of basis other than cost. • Nonbusiness energy property credit (al-to your spouse or to your former spouse incident lowed beginning in 2006 but not for 2008)to your divorce, you in most cases have no gain claimed for making certain energy savingor loss. This is true even if you receive cash or Adjusted Basis improvements you added to the basis ofother consideration for the home. As a result, the your home.rules in this chapter do not apply. Adjusted basis is your cost or other basis in-
• Residential energy efficient property creditcreased or decreased by certain amounts. ToMore information. If you need more infor- (allowed beginning in 2006) claimed forfigure your adjusted basis, you can use Work-mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication making certain energy saving improve-sheet 1 in Publication 523.523 and Property Settlements in Publication ments you added to the basis of your504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. Do not use Worksheet 1 if you acquired home.an interest in your home from a dece-
Involuntary conversion. You have a disposi- • Adoption credit you claimed for improve-dent who died in 2010. Instead use
CAUTION
!
tion when your home is destroyed or con- ments added to the basis of your home.Publication 4895, Tax Treatment of Property
demned and you receive other property or Acquired From a Decedent Dying in 2010. • Nontaxable payments from an adoptionmoney in payment, such as insurance or a con-
assistance program of your employer youdemnation award. This is treated as a sale and Increases to basis. These include the follow-
used for improvements you added to theyou may be able to exclude all or part of any gain ing.
basis of your home.from the destruction or condemnation of your • Additions and other improvements thathome, as explained later under Special Situa- • Energy conservation subsidy excludedhave a useful life of more than 1 year.tions. from your gross income because you re-
• Special assessments for local improve- ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-
ments. lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyDetermining Basis
energy conservation measure. An energy• Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-
conservation measure is an installation orYou need to know your basis in your home to store damaged property.
modification primarily designed either tofigure any gain or loss when you sell it. Your
reduce consumption of electricity or natu-basis in your home is determined by how you got Improvements. These add to the value of
the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it or ral gas or to improve the management ofyour home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it to
built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri- energy demand for a home.new uses. You add the cost of additions and
tance, gift, etc.), your basis is either its fair mar- other improvements to the basis of your prop- • Carry forward of the District of Columbiaket value when you received it or the adjusted erty. first-time homebuyer credit (allowed on thebasis of the previous owner. For example, putting a recreation room or purchase of a principal residence in theWhile you owned your home, you may have another bathroom in your unfinished basement, District of Columbia beginning on Augustmade adjustments (increases or decreases) to putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbing 5, 1997 and ending on December 31,your home's basis. The result of these adjust- or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your 2009).ments is your home's adjusted basis, which is unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi-
used to figure gain or loss on the sale of your tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-
home. See Adjusted Basis, later. At the time this publication went toroom, or a new garage, is also an improvement.
You can find more information on basis and print, Congress was considering legis-Repairs. These maintain your home in goodadjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication lation that would extend the itemized
CAUTION
!condition but do not add to its value or prolongand in Publication 523. deduction for general sales taxes through 2010.its life. You do not add their cost to the basis of To find out if this legislation was enacted, and foryour property. more details, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs.For example, repainting your house inside orCost As Basis outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing Recordkeeping.  You should keep
leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win- records to prove your home's adjustedThe cost of property is the amount you pay for it
dow panes are examples of repairs. basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv-
RECORDS
ords for 3 years after the due date for filing yourices. Decreases to basis. These include the fol- return for the tax year in which you sold yourlowing.Purchase. If you buy your home, your basis is home. But if you sold a home before May 7,
its cost to you. This includes the purchase price • Discharges of qualified principal indebted- 1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basis
and certain settlement or closing costs. In most ness (but do not reduce basis below zero). of that home affects the basis of the new home
cases, your purchase price includes your down you bought. Keep records proving the basis of• Gain you postponed from the sale of apayment and any debt, such as a first or second both homes as long as they are needed for taxprevious home before May 7, 1997.mortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay- purposes.
ment for the home. If you build, or contract to • General sales taxes claimed as an item- The records you should keep include:build, a new home, your purchase price can ized deduction on Schedule A (Form
• Proof of the home's purchase price andinclude costs of construction, as discussed in 1040) from 2004 through 2009 that were
Publication 523. imposed on the purchase of personal purchase expenses,
Page 108 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 111 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Receipts and other records for all improve- • Owned the home for at least 2 years (the the leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-
cause his leave was not a short temporary ab-ownership test), andments, additions, and other items that af-
sence, he cannot include the period of leave tofect the home's adjusted basis, • Lived in the home as your main home for meet the 2-year use test. He cannot exclude anyat least 2 years (the use test).• Any worksheets or other computations you part of his gain, because he did not use theused to figure the adjusted basis of the residence for the required 2 years.home you sold, the gain or loss on the Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-sale, the exclusion, and the taxable gain, Ownership and use tests met at differenterty as your main home for less than 2 years, times. You can meet the ownership and useyou can still claim an exclusion in some cases.• Any Form 982 you filed to report any dis- tests during different 2-year periods. However,The maximum amount you may be able to ex-charge of qualified principal residence in- you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-clude will be reduced. See Reduced Maximumdebtedness, riod ending on the date of the sale.Exclusion, later.• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, you
Example. In 2000, Helen Jones lived in afiled to postpone gain from the sale of a Example 1 Ðhome owned and occupied rented apartment. The apartment building wasprevious home before May 7, 1997, and for at least 2 years. Amanda bought and later converted to condominiums, and shemoved into her main home in September 2007.• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form bought her same apartment on December 3,She sold the home at a gain on September 15,2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home 2007. In 2008, Helen became ill and on April 142010. During the 5-year period ending on theSold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- of that year she moved to her daughter's home.date of sale (September 16, 2005 ±Septemberments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- On July 12, 2010, while still living in her daugh-15, 2010), she owned and lived in the home forstructions, or other source of ter's home, she sold her condominium.more than 2 years. She meets the ownershipcomputations. Helen can exclude gain on the sale of herand use tests. condominium because she met the ownership
and use tests during the 5-year period from JulyExample 2 Ðownership test met but use 13, 2005, to July 12, 2010, the date she sold thetest not met. Dan bought a home in 2005. condominium. She owned her condominiumAfter living in it for 6 months, he moved out. HeExcluding the Gain from December 3, 2007, to July 12, 2010 (morenever lived in the home again and sold it at a than 2 years). She lived in the property from Julygain on June 28, 2010. He owned the homeYou may qualify to exclude from your income all 13, 2005 (the beginning of the 5-year period), toduring the entire 5-year period ending on theor part of any gain from the sale of your main April 14, 2008 (more than 2 years).date of sale (June 29, 2005 ±June 28, 2010).home. This means that, if you qualify, you will The time Helen lived in her daughter's homeHowever, he did not live in it for the required 2not have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit during the 5-year period can be counted towardyears. He meets the ownership test but not thedescribed under Maximum Exclusion, next. To her period of ownership, and the time she liveduse test. He cannot exclude any part of his gainqualify, you must meet the ownership and use in her rented apartment during the 5-year periodon the sale unless he qualified for a reducedtests described later. can be counted toward her period of use.maximum exclusion (explained later).You can choose not to take the exclusion by Cooperative apartment. If you sold stock asincluding the gain from the sale in your gross a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housingincome on your tax return for the year of the Period of Ownership and Use corporation, the ownership and use tests aresale. met if, during the 5-year period ending on theYou can use Worksheet 2 in Publication 523 The required 2 years of ownership and use dur- date of sale, you:to figure the amount of your exclusion and your ing the 5-year period ending on the date of the
• Owned the stock for at least 2 years, andtaxable gain, if any. sale do not have to be continuous nor do they
have to occur at the same time. • Lived in the house or apartment that theIf you have any taxable gain from the
 You meet the tests if you can show that you stock entitles you to occupy as your mainsale of your home, you may have to
owned and lived in the property as your main home for at least 2 years.increase your withholding or make esti-
CAUTION
!
home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365mated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax
×  2) during the 5-year period ending on the dateWithholding and Estimated Tax. Exceptions to Ownership and Useof sale.
Tests
Temporary absence. Short temporary ab-Maximum Exclusion
The following sections contain exceptions to thesences for vacations or other seasonal ab-
ownership and use tests for certain taxpayers.You can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain on sences, even if you rent out the property during
the sale of your main home if all of the following the absences, are counted as periods of use. Exception for individuals with a disability.are true. The following examples assume that the re- There is an exception to the use test if, duringduced maximum exclusion (discussed later) the 5-year period before the sale of your home:• You meet the ownership test. does not apply to the sales.
• You become physically or mentally unable• You meet the use test.
to care for yourself, andExample 1. David Johnson, who is single,• During the 2-year period ending on the bought and moved into his home on February 1, • You owned and lived in your home as yourdate of the sale, you did not exclude gain 2008. Each year during 2008 and 2009, David main home for a total of at least 1 year.from the sale of another home. left his home for a 2-month summer vacation.
Under this exception, you are considered to liveDavid sold the house on March 1, 2010. Al-You may be able to exclude up to $500,000 of in your home during any time that you own thethough the total time David used his home isthe gain on the sale of your main home if you are home and live in a facility (including a nursingless than 2 years (21 months), he may excludemarried and file a joint return and meet the home) licensed by a state or political subdivisionany gain up to $250,000. The 2-month vacationsrequirements listed in the discussion of the spe- to care for persons in your condition.are short temporary absences and are countedcial rules for joint returns, later, under Married as periods of use in determining whether David If you meet this exception to the use test, youPersons. used the home for the required 2 years. still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership
test to claim the exclusion.Example 2. Professor Paul Beard, who isOwnership and Use Tests
single, bought and moved into a house on Au- Previous home destroyed or condemned.
To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own- gust 28, 2007. He lived in it as his main home For the ownership and use tests, you add the
ership and use tests. This means that during the continuously until January 5, 2009, when he time you owned and lived in a previous home
5-year period ending on the date of the sale, you went abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. On that was destroyed or condemned to the time
February 6, 2010, 1 month after returning frommust have: you owned and lived in the replacement home
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 109

Page 112 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on whose sale you wish to exclude gain. This Gain is in most cases allocated to periods of • The sale or exchange took place after
nonqualified use based on the ratio which: (1)rule applies if any part of the basis of the home 2008.
the aggregate periods of nonqualified use duringyou sold depended on the basis of the destroyed • The sale or exchange took place no morethe period the property was owned by you overor condemned home. Otherwise, you must have than 2 years after the date of death of your(2) the total period the property was owned byowned and lived in the same home for 2 of the 5 spouse.you. You do not incorporate any period beforeyears before the sale to qualify for the exclusion.
2009 for the aggregate periods of nonqualified • You have not remarried.
Members of the uniformed services or For- use. Certain exceptions apply. For details, see • You and your spouse met the use test ateign Service, employees of the intelligence Publication 523. the time of your spouse's death.community, or employees or volunteers of
the Peace Corps. You can choose to have the • You or your spouse met the ownership
5-year test period for ownership and use sus- test at the time of your spouse's death.Married Persons
pended during any period you or your spouse • Neither you nor your spouse excludedIf you and your spouse file a joint return for theserve on ªqualified official extended dutyº as a gain from the sale of another home duringyear of sale and one spouse meets the owner-member of the uniformed services or Foreign the last 2 years.ship and use test, you can exclude up toService of the United States, as an employee of
$250,000 of the gain. (But see Special rules forthe intelligence community, or as an employee Example. Harry has owned and used ajoint returns, next.)or volunteer of the Peace Corps. This means house as his main home since 2007. Harry andthat you may be able to meet the 2-year use test Wilma marry on July 1, 2010, and from that dateSpecial rules for joint returns. You can ex-even if, because of your service, you did not they use Harry's house as their main home.clude up to $500,000 of the gain on the sale ofactually live in your home for at least the re- Harry died on August 15, 2010, and Wilma in-your main home if all of the following are true.quired 2 years during the 5-year period ending herited the property. Wilma sold the property onon the date of sale. • You are married and file a joint return for September 1, 2010, at which time she had not
the year.If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you remarried. Although Wilma owned and used the
can choose to have the 5-year test period sus- house for less than 2 years, Wilma is considered• Either you or your spouse meets the own-pended by filing a return for the year of sale that to have satisfied the ownership and use testsership test.does not include the gain. because her period of ownership and use in-• Both you and your spouse meet the use cludes the period that Harry owned and used thetest.Example. David bought and moved into a property before death.
home in 2002. He lived in it as his main home for • During the 2-year period ending on the21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live in Home transferred from spouse. If yourdate of the sale, neither you nor yourit because he was on qualified official extended home was transferred to you by your spouse (orspouse excluded gain from the sale of an-duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a former spouse if the transfer was incident toother home.gain in 2010. To meet the use test, David divorce), you are considered to have owned itIf either spouse does not satisfy all these re-chooses to suspend the 5-year test period for during any period of time when your spousequirements, the maximum exclusion that can bethe 6 years he was on qualified official extended owned it.claimed by the couple is the total of the maxi-duty. This means he can disregard those 6
mum exclusions that each spouse would qualifyyears. Therefore, David's 5-year test period con- Use of home after divorce. You are consid-for if not married and the amounts were figuredsists of the 5 years before he went on qualified ered to have used property as your main homeseparately. For this purpose, each spouse isofficial extended duty. He meets the ownership during any period when:treated as owning the property during the periodand use tests because he owned and lived in the
that either spouse owned the property. • You owned it, andhome for 21/2 years during this test period.
• Your spouse or former spouse is allowedPeriod of suspension. The period of sus- Example 1 Ðone spouse sells a home. to live in it under a divorce or separationpension cannot last more than 10 years. To- Emily sells her home in June 2010. She marries instrument and uses it as his or her maingether, the 10-year suspension period and the Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner- home.5-year test period can be as long as, but no ship and use tests, but Jamie does not. Emily
more than, 15 years. You cannot suspend the can exclude up to $250,000 of gain on a sepa-
5-year period for more than one property at a rate or joint return for 2010. The $500,000 maxi- Reduced Maximumtime. You can revoke your choice to suspend the mum exclusion for certain joint returns does not
5-year period at any time. apply because Jamie does not meet the use Exclusion
For more information about the suspension test.
of the 5-year test period, see Members of the If you fail to meet the requirements to qualify for
uniformed services or Foreign Service, employ- the $250,000 or $500,000 exclusion, you mayExample 2 Ðeach spouse sells a home.
ees of the intelligence community, or employees still qualify for a reduced exclusion. This appliesThe facts are the same as in Example 1 except
or volunteers of the Peace Corps in Publication to those who:that Jamie also sells a home in 2010 before he
523. marries Emily. He meets the ownership and use • Fail to meet the ownership and use tests,tests on his home, but Emily does not. Emily and orPeriods of nonqualified use. In most cases, Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain
gain from the sale or exchange of your main • Have used the exclusion within 2 years offrom the sale of their individual homes. The
home will not qualify for the exclusion to the selling their current home.$500,000 maximum exclusion for certain joint
extent that the gains are allocated to periods of returns does not apply because Emily and Ja- .nonqualified use. Nonqualified use is any period mie do not jointly meet the use test for the same
after December 31, 2008, during which the prop- In both cases, to qualify for a reduced exclu-home.
erty is not used as the main home. sion, the sale of your main home must be due to
The gain resulting from the sale of the prop- Sale of main home by surviving spouse. If one of the following reasons.
erty is allocated between qualified and nonquali- your spouse died and you did not remarry before • A change in place of employment.fied use periods based on the amount of time the the date of sale, you are considered to have
property was held for qualified and nonqualified • Health.owned and lived in the property as your main
use. Gain from the sale or exchange of a main home during any period of time when your • Unforeseen circumstances.home allocable to periods of qualified use will spouse owned and lived in it as a main home.
continue to qualify for the exclusion for the sale If you meet all of the following requirements,
of your main home. Gain from the sale or ex- Unforeseen circumstances. The sale of youryou may qualify to exclude up to $500,000 of
change of property allocable to nonqualified use main home is because of an unforeseen circum-any gain from the sale or exchange of your main
will not qualify for the exclusion. stance if your primary reason for the sale is thehome.
Page 110 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 113 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
occurrence of an event that you could not rea- then you may limit the amount of gain recog- the buyer your SSN. Failure to meet these re-
nized to the depreciation allowed. See Publica- quirements may result in a $50 penalty for eachsonably have anticipated before buying and oc-
tion 544 for more information. failure. If either you or the buyer does not havecupying your main home.
and is not eligible to get an SSN, see SocialSee Publication 523 for more information Property used partly for business or rental. Security Number in chapter 1.and to use Worksheet 3 to figure your reduced If you used property partly as a home and partlymaximum exclusion. More information. For more information onfor business or to produce rental income, see installment sales, see Publication 537, Install-Publication 523. ment Sales.
Business Use or 
Reporting the Sale Special SituationsRental of Home
Do not report the 2010 sale of your main home The situations that follow may affect your exclu-You may be able to exclude gain from the sale of on your tax return unless: sion.a home you have used for business or to pro-
• You have a gain and do not qualify toduce rental income. But you must meet the own- Sale of home acquired in a like-kind ex-exclude all of it,ership and use tests. change. You cannot claim the exclusion if:
• You have a gain and choose not to ex- • You acquired your home in a like-kind ex-Example 1. On May 28, 2004, Amy bought clude it, or change (also known as a section 1031 ex-a house. She moved in on that date and lived in change) or your basis in your home is• You have a loss and received Formit until May 31, 2006, when she moved out of the determined by reference to the basis of1099-S. the home in the hands of the person whohouse and put it up for rent. The house was
acquired the property in a like-kind ex-rented from June 1, 2006, to March 31, 2008.  If you have any taxable gain on the sale of change (for example, you received theAmy moved back into the house on April 1, your main home that cannot be excluded, report home from that person as a gift), and2008, and lived there until she sold it on January the entire gain on Schedule D (Form 1040). • You sold the home during the 5-year pe-29, 2010. During the 5-year period ending on the Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 of riod beginning with the date your homedate of the sale (January 31, 2005±January 29, Schedule D, as short-term or long-term capital was acquired in the like-kind exchange.2010), Amy owned and lived in the house for gain depending on how long you owned the Gain from a like-kind exchange is not taxable atmore than 2 years as shown in the following home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show it on the time of the exchange. This means that gaintable. the line directly below the line on which you will not be taxed until you sell or otherwise dis-report the gain. Enter ªSection 121 exclusionº in pose of the property you receive. To defer gainFive Year Used as Used as column (a) of that line and show the amount of from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex- Period  Home  Rental the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren- changed business or investment property for
 1/31/05 ± theses). business or investment property of a like kind.
5/31/06 16 months For more information about like-kind ex-If you have a loss on the sale of your main
changes, see Publication 544, Sales and Otherhome for which you received a Form 1099-S, 6/1/06 ± Dispositions of Assets.you must report the loss on Schedule D even3/31/08  22 months
though the loss is not deductible. Report the Home relinquished in a like-kind exchange. 4/1/08 ± transaction on line 1 or 8, as above. Complete If you use your main home partly for business or1/29/10 22 months columns (a) through (e). Enter -0- in column (f). rental purposes and then exchange the home38 months 22 months If you used the home for business or to for another property, see Publication 523.
produce rental income, you may have to useAmy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However, Expatriates. You cannot claim the exclusion ifForm 4797 to report the sale of the business orshe cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria-rental part (or the sale of the entire property ifthe depreciation she claimed or could have tion tax applies to certain U.S. citizens who haveused entirely for business or rental). See Busi-claimed for renting the house, as explained later renounced their citizenship (and to certainness Use or Rental of Home  in Publication 523 long-term residents who have ended their resi-under Depreciation after May 6, 1997. and the Instructions for Form 4797. dency). For more information about the expatria-
tion tax, see chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.Example 2. William owned and used a Installment sale. Some sales are made under Tax Guide for Aliens.house as his main home from 2004 through arrangements that provide for part or all of the
2007. On January 1, 2008, he moved to another Home destroyed or condemned. If yourselling price to be paid in a later year. These
state. He rented his house from that date until home was destroyed or condemned, any gainsales are called ªinstallment sales.º If you fi-
(for example, because of insurance proceedsApril 30, 2010, when he sold it. During the 5-year nance the buyer's purchase of your home your- you received) qualifies for the exclusion.period ending on the date of sale (May 1, self instead of having the buyer get a loan or Any part of the gain that cannot be excluded2005±April 30, 2010), William owned and lived mortgage from a bank, you probably have an (because it is more than the maximum exclu-in the house for 32 months (more than 2 years). installment sale. You may be able to report the sion) can be postponed under the rules ex-He must report the sale on Form 4797 because part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in- plained in:
it was rental property at the time of sale. Be- stallment basis. • Publication 547, in the case of a home thatcause he met the ownership and use tests, he Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, to was destroyed, orcan exclude gain up to $250,000. However, he report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15
• Publication 544, chapter 1, in the case of aof Form 6252.cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the
home that was condemned.depreciation he claimed or could have claimed Seller-financed mortgage. If you sell yourfor renting the house, as explained next. home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan- Sale of remainder interest. Subject to thecial agreement, the payments you receive in other rules in this chapter, you can choose toDepreciation after May 6, 1997. If you were most cases consist of both interest and princi- exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-entitled to take depreciation deductions be- pal. You must separately report as interest in- est in your home. If you make this choice, youcause you used your home for business pur- come the interest you receive as part of each cannot choose to exclude gain from your sale of
poses or as rental property, you cannot exclude payment. If the buyer of your home uses the any other interest in the home that you sell
the part of your gain equal to any depreciation separately.property as a main or second home, you must
allowed or allowable as a deduction for periods also report the name, address, and social secur- Exception for sales to related persons.after May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate ity number (SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of You cannot exclude gain from the sale of a
records or other evidence that the depreciation Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040). The buyer remainder interest in your home to a related
allowed was less than the amount allowable, must give you his or her SSN, and you must give person. Related persons include your brothers,
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 111

Page 114 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, an- • You transfer the home to your spouse, or
to your former spouse incident to a di-cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal
vorce, where no gain is included in yourdescendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). Re-
income.lated persons also include certain corporations, 16.
partnerships, trusts, and exempt organizations. • You dispose of the home at a loss.
• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and
you replace it on its original site within 2 Reporting Gainsyears after the end of the tax year whenRecapturing (Paying the destruction happened (within 5 years if
the home was in the Hurricane Katrina dis- and LossesBack) a Federal aster area and was destroyed by reason
of the hurricane after August 24, 2005). IfMortgage Subsidy your home was located in the Kansas dis-
aster area, one of the Midwestern disasterIf you financed your home under a federally Introductionareas, or another federally declared disas-subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt ter area, see Replacement Period in Publi- This chapter discusses how to report capitalqualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort- cation 547. gains and losses from sales, exchanges, andgage credit certificates), you may have to recap- other dispositions of investment property on• You refinance your mortgage loan (unlessture all or part of the benefit you received from Schedule D (Form 1040). The discussion in-you later meet the conditions listed previ-that program when you sell or otherwise dispose cludes the following topics.ously under When recapture applies).of your home. You recapture the benefit by in-
creasing your federal income tax for the year of • How to report short-term gains and losses.
the sale. You may have to pay this recapture tax Notice of amounts. At or near the time of • How to report long-term gains and losses.even if you can exclude your gain from income settlement of your mortgage loan, you shouldunder the rules discussed earlier; that exclusion • How to figure capital loss carryovers.receive a notice that provides the federally sub-does not affect the recapture tax. sidized amount and other information you will • How to figure your tax on a net capitalneed to figure your recapture tax. gain.Loans subject to recapture rules. The re-
How to figure and report the recapture. Thecapture applies to loans that: • An illustrated example of how to completerecapture tax is figured on Form 8828. If you sell Schedule D.1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort- your home and your mortgage is subject to re-
gage bonds, or capture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if If you sell or otherwise dispose of propertyyou do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Form2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi- used in a trade or business or for the production8828 to your Form 1040. For more information,cates. of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Othersee Form 8828 and its instructions. Dispositions of Assets, before completingThe recapture also applies to assumptions of Schedule D.these loans.
When recapture applies. Recapture of the Useful ItemsRecapturing (Payingfederal mortgage subsidy applies only if you You may want to see:
meet both of the following conditions. Back) the First-Time Publication• Within the first 9 years after the date you
Homebuyer Creditclose your mortgage loan, you sell or oth- ❏ 537 Installment Sales
erwise dispose of your home at a gain.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofRecapture of 2008 first-time homebuyer• Your income for the year of disposition is Assetscredit. If you claimed the first-time homebuyermore than that year's adjusted qualifying
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensescredit in 2008, and you sold the home or theincome for your family size for that year
home stopped being your main home in 2010,(related to the income requirements a per-
Form (and Instructions)you generally must repay the credit. You repayson must meet to qualify for the federally
the credit by including it as additional tax on thesubsidized program). ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainsreturn for the year your home stops being your and Lossesmain home. For details, see chapter 37.When recapture does not apply. Recapture ❏ 4797 Sales of Business PropertyRecapture of first-time homebuyer credit fordoes not apply in any of the following situations.
purchases in 2009 or 2010. If you claimed ❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income• Your mortgage loan was a qualified home the 2009 or 2010 first-time homebuyer credit ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsimprovement loan (QHIL) of not more than when you purchased your home, the credit is not$15,000 used for alterations, repairs, and required to be repaid unless your home ceasesimprovements that protect or improve the to be your main home within 36 months of thebasic livability or energy efficiency of your date of purchase. See the Instructions for Formhome. 5405 for details on the exceptions that apply. Reporting Capital• Your mortgage loan was a QHIL of not
more than $150,000 in the case of a QHIL Gains and Lossesused to repair damage from Hurricane Ka-
trina to homes in the hurricane disaster Report capital gains and losses on Schedule Darea; a QHIL funded by a qualified mort- (Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades ofgage bond that is a qualified Gulf Opportu- stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-nity Zone Bond; or a QHIL for an ported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, orowner-occupied home in the Gulf Opportu- 8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, asnity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or appropriate. Include all these transactions evenWilma GO Zone. For more information, if you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceedssee Publication 4492, Information for Tax- From Broker and Barter Exchange Transac-payers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, tions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From RealRita, and Wilma. Also see Publication Estate Transactions (or substitute statement).4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay-
You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuationers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas.
schedule to report more transactions.• The home is disposed of as a result of Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-your death. umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column• You dispose of the home more than 9
years after the date you closed your mort- (d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.
gage loan. Then add the following amounts reported to you
Page 112 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 115 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for 2010 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S • Stock in a cooperative housing corporation Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or
(or on substitute statements): (as defined in section 216 of the Internal loss on the sale or trade of investment property
Revenue Code). held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or• Proceeds from transactions involving loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If thestocks, bonds, and other securities, and A ªreal estate reporting personº could include amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
• Gross proceeds from real estate transac- the buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or in parentheses.
tions (other than the sale of your main escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- You combine your share of short-term capitalhome if you had no taxable gain) not re- ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,ported on another form or schedule. the biggest interest in the property. and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- carryover, with your other short-term capitalIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 and ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-10, attach a statement to your return explaining gains and losses to figure your net short-termlow the instructions for Schedule D to reportthe difference. capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.these transactions and include them on line 1 or
8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex-Installment sales. You cannot use the install- Long-term gains and losses. A capital gainchanges on Form 8824 instead.ment method to report a gain from the sale of or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-It is unlawful for any real estate reportingstock or securities traded on an established se- erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalperson to separately charge you for complyingcurities market. You must report the entire gain gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedulewith the requirement to file Form 1099-S.in the year of sale (the year in which the trade D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,date occurs). Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a show it in parentheses.
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your You also report the following in Part II ofname but actually belong to someone else),Passive activity gains and losses. If you Schedule D:report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only thehave gains or losses from a passive activity, you
• Undistributed long-term capital gains fromproceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol-may also have to report them on Form 8582. In
a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-lowing amounts reported to you for 2010 onsome cases, the loss may be limited under the
Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- ment company) or real estate investmentpassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
ments) that you are not reporting on anotherseparate instructions for more information about trust (REIT),
form or schedule included with your return:reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- • Your share of long-term capital gains orsive activity. losses from partnerships, S corporations,1. Proceeds from transactions involving
and fiduciaries,stocks, bonds, and other securities, andForm 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-
• All capital gain distributions from mutualerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- 2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
funds and REITs not reported directly onties, through a broker, you should receive Form tions (other than the sale of your main
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker. home if you are not required to report it).
1040, andUse the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state- If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total ofment to complete Schedule D. • Long-term capital loss carryovers.lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your returnReport the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of explaining the reason for the difference.Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column  The result after combining these items withFile Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, your other long-term capital gains and losses isIRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-whichever applies. However, if the broker ad- your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofnee in 2010, you must file a Form 1099-B orvises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross Schedule D).Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a Capital gain distributions only. You doand option premiums were reported to the IRS,
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of not have to file Schedule D if both the followingenter that net sales price in column (d) of either
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. are true.
nue Service Center by February 28, 2011 If the net sales price is entered in column (d), • The only amounts you would have to re-(March 31, 2011, if you file Form 1099-B or Formdo not include the commissions and option pre- port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner ofmiums in column (e). butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (orthe proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or substitute statement).Form 1099-S by February 16, 2011. On FormForm 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora- 1099-B, you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,tion in which you own stock has had a change in other owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitutecontrol or a substantial change in capital struc- On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the statement).ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or an ªFiler.º The other owner should be listed as theequivalent statement from the corporation. Use ªTransferor.º You do not, however, have to file athe Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement to If both the above statements are true, reportForm 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceedsfigure the gain to report on Schedule D (Form your capital gain distributions directly on line 13for your spouse. For more information about the1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule D of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Alsoreporting requirements and the penalties for fail-(Form 1040) as a result of this transaction. use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gainure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,Report the aggregate amount received Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions tosee the General Instructions for Certain Informa-shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the gross figure your tax.tion Returns (Forms 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922,sales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8 5498, and W-2G). If you are filing electronically You can report your capital gain distributionsof Schedule D, whichever applies. see Publication 1220. on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form
1040, if both the following are true.Sale of property bought at various times. IfForm 1099-S transactions. If you sold or
you sell a block of stock or other property thattraded reportable real estate, you generally • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substituteyou bought at various times, report theshould receive from the real estate reporting statements) you received have an amountshort-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineperson a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro- in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orceeds.
• You do not have to file Form 1040 for anyloss on one line in Part II. Write ªVariousº inªReportable real estateº is defined as any
other capital gains or losses.column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See thepresent or future ownership interest in any of the
Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.following:
Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netSale expenses.  Add to your cost or other• Improved or unimproved land, including air
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalbasis any expense of sale such as brokers' fees,space,
gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termcommissions, state and local transfer taxes, and• Inherently permanent structures, including capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result onoption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount inany residential, commercial, or industrial Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses arecolumn (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedulebuilding, more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.D, whichever applies, unless you reported the
If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- net sales price amount in column (d).
Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gaintures and common elements, including For more information about adjustments to
Tax Rates, later.land, and basis, see chapter 13.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Page 116 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. All of your net capital gain is fromTable 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would
be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-THEN your able income is $25,000, none of your taxablemaximum capital income will be taxed above the 15% rate. TheIF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ... 28% rate does not apply.
a collectibles gain 28% Investment interest deducted. If you claim a
deduction for investment interest, you may havean eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the to reduce the amount of your net capital gainsection 1202 exclusion 28% that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gainan unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% you choose to include in investment income
when figuring the limit on your investment inter-other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%
est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dor higher 15%
Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is
tion about the limit on investment interest, seelower than 25% 0%
Interest Expenses  in chapter 3 of Publication
550.1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss
from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-
erage held more than 1 year.Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities inCapital Losses Collectibles gain includes gain from sale of2010. The sales resulted in a capital loss of
an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.If your capital losses are more than your capital trust due to unrealized appreciation of col-Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointgains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. lectibles.2010 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),enclosed in parentheses. Gain on qualified small business stock. Ifcan be carried over to 2011. you realized a gain from qualified small businessIf their capital loss had been $2,000, their stock that you held more than 5 years, youLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. generally can exclude up to 50% of your gainloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the They would have no carryover. from income. The exclusion can be up to 75%lesser of:
for stock acquired after February 17, 2009Use short-term losses first. When you fig-• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file (100% for stock acquired after September 27,ure your capital loss carryover, use youra separate return), or 2010), and before January 1, 2011. The exclu-short-term capital losses first, even if you in-
sion can be up to 60% for certain empowermentcurred them after a long-term capital loss. If you• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of
zone business stock. The eligible gain minushave not reached the limit on the capital lossSchedule D.
your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain.deduction after using the short-term capital
See Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock inlosses, use the long-term capital losses until youYou can use your total net loss to reduce your
chapter 4 of Publication 550.reach the limit.income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally,Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net this is any part of your capital gain from sellingsustained by a decedent during his or her last
loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than section 1250 property (real property) that is duetax year (or carried over to that year from an
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-earlier year) can be deducted only on the final
can carry over the unused part to the next year tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in theincome tax return filed for the decedent. The
and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in
year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructionsthis situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-
carry it over to later years until it is completely to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.duct any of the loss or carry it over to following
used up. For more information about section 1250 prop-years.
erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 ofWhen you figure the amount of any capital Joint and separate returns. If you and your Publication 544.loss carryover to the next year, you must take spouse once filed separate returns and are nowthe current year's allowable deduction into ac- Tax computation using maximum capitalfiling a joint return, combine your separate capi-count, whether or not you claimed it and whether gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends andtal loss carryovers. However, if you and youror not you filed a return for the current year. Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule Dspouse once filed a joint return and are now
When you carry over a loss, it remains long Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figurefiling separate returns, any capital loss carryover
term or short term. A long-term capital loss you your tax if you have qualified dividends or netfrom the joint return can be deducted only on the
carry over to the next tax year will reduce that capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-return of the spouse who actually had the loss.
year's long-term capital gains before it reduces ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.
that year's short-term capital gains. Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use
Figuring your carryover. The amount of the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the ScheduleCapital Gain Tax Ratesyour capital loss carryover is the amount of your D instructions to figure your tax if:
total net loss that is more than the lesser of: The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are • You have to file Schedule D, and
generally lower than the tax rates that apply to1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for • Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or lineother income. These lower rates are called thethe year, or 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), ismaximum capital gain rates. more than zero.2. Your taxable income increased by your al- The term ªnet capital gainº means the
lowable capital loss deduction for the year amount by which your net long-term capital gain See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex-and your deduction for personal exemp- for the year is more than your net short-term ample of how to figure your tax using the Sched-
tions. capital loss. ule D Tax Worksheet.
For 2010, the maximum capital gain ratesIf your deductions are more than your gross Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxare 0%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 forincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- Worksheet. If you do not have to use thedetails.able income in computing the amount in item (2). Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained
  Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work- If you figure your tax using the maxi- above) and any of the following apply, use the
sheet in the Instructions for Schedule D or Publi- mum capital gain rates and the regular Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
cation 550 to determine the part of your capital tax computation results in a lower tax, sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form
TIP
loss for 2010 that you can carry over to 2011. the regular tax computation applies. 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
Page 114 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 117 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You received qualified dividends. (See and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She her broker. For 2010, the total of lines 3 and 10
Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.) reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in of Schedule D is $12,000, which is the same
Part I of Schedule D. amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B• You do not have to file Schedule D and (not shown).Emily had other stock sales that she reportsyou received capital gain distributions.
as long-term transactions on line 8 in Part II of(See Capital gain distributions only, ear- Capital loss carryover from 2009. EmilySchedule D.lier.) has a capital loss carryover to 2010 of $800, of
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co. which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both stock for $5,000. She bought 100 of those is long-term capital loss. She enters thesemore than zero. shares in 1998, for $1,000. She bought 100 amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Shemore shares in 2000 for $2,200, and an addi- also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-Alternative minimum tax. These capital gain tional 300 shares in 2003 for $1,500. Her total ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-rates are also used in figuring alternative mini- basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300 sheet.mum tax. ($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-enters in column (f) of line 8.
over Worksheet in her 2009 edition of Publica-In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co. tion 550 (not shown), so she could properlystock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi- report her loss carryover for the 2010 tax yearness stock that she bought in September 2005.Comprehensive without refiguring it.Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain,
which she enters in column (f) of line 8. BecauseExample Tax computation. Because Emily has
she held the stock more than 5 years, she has a gains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,
$1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims theEmily Jones is single and, in addition to wages she checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to
exclusion on the line below by entering $1,500from her job, she has income from stocks and line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 ofother securities. For the 2010 tax year, she had as a loss in column (f). She also enters the the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18the following capital gains and losses, which she exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of the is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box onreports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheetis shown at the end of this example. She received a Form 1099-B (not shown) to figure her tax.
from her broker for each of these transactions.Capital gains and losses Ð Schedule D. After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13The entries shown in box 2 of these forms totalEmily sold stock in two different companies that of her Form 1040, she completes the rest of$12,000.she held for less than a year. In June, she sold Form 1040 through line 43. She enters the100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theReconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emilybought in February. She had an adjusted basis Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out themakes sure that the total of the amounts re-of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax asported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of $4,040. This is less than the tax she would haveule D is not less than the total of the amountsComputer Co. stock that she bought in June. figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,085.shown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily JonesÐLine 18 Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1 ................................................................... . 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain ... . 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
.............. . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. (  500)box 11, code C ................................................................ .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 6. (  550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. . 7. 450
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

Page 118 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and Capital
Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or 
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) is zero or less.
 Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (However, if you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet on page 38 of the Form 1040 instructions) ............................................. . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or
Form 1040NR, line 10b) ........................ . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used
to figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g ............. . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4e* ....................... . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ....... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ..... . 7. 750
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................. . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 9. 750
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ...................................................... . 10. 750
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D** ............................. . 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 .......................................... . 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 ............................................................. . 13. 300
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................................. . 14. 29,700
15. Enter:
• $34,000 if single or married filing separately;
}
• $68,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
• $45,550 if head of household ....... . 15. 34,000
16. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 15 .......................................... . 16. 30,000
17. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 16 ............................ . 17. 29,700
18. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 18. 29,250
19. Enter the larger of line 17 or line 18 ......................................... . © 19. 29,700
20. Subtract line 17 from line 16. This amount is taxed at 0%. ........................... . © 20. 300
If lines 1 and 16 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................. . 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 20 (if line 20 is blank, enter -0-) .............. . 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 23.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) ............................................................. . 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................ . 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 19 .......................... . 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................ . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- .................. . 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 29.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) ............................................................. . 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 19, 20, 23, and 29 ............................................... . 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................ . 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) ............................................................. . 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 19. If the amount on line 19 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax.
If the amount on line 19 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet .......................... . 34. 4,040
35. Add lines 24, 30, 33, and 34 ............................................................. . 35. 4,040
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. If the amount on line 1 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax. If
the amount on line 1 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet ............................ . 36. 4,085
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42). (If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, do not
enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in the
Form 1040 instructions) ................................................................ . 37. 4,040
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
**If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the
Form 1040 instructions before completing this line.
Page 116 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 119 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
May 5, 2010
SCHEDULE D  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Capital Gains and Losses
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.   a See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).   
a Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less 
(a) Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(e) Cost or other basis   
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d)   
1 
2 Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 2 ................. 2 
3 Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 
2 in column (d) .............. 3 
4 Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 . 4 
5 Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ............................  5 
6 Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............... 6 (                                   )
7 Net short-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f) ....... 7 
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year 
(a)  Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(e) Cost or other basis   
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d)   
8 
9 Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 9 ................. 9 
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.  Add lines 8 and 
9 in  column (d).............. 10 
11 Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or 
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 .................... 11 
12 Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ............................ 12 
13 Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions .............. 13 
14 Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............... 14 (                                   )
15 Net long-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to Part III 
on the back ..............................
15 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11338H Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
100 sh. Trucking Co. 2-11-10 6-12-10 400 1,150 ( 750 )
25 sh. Computer Co. 6-30-10 7-30-10 2,500 2,000 500
2,900
300
( 550 )
500 sh. Furniture Co. VARIOUS 6-30-10 5,000 4,700 300
20 sh. toy Co. 9-28-05 12-15-10 4,100 1,100 3,000
Section 1202 exclusion ( 1,500  )
9,100
500
1,300
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 117

Page 120 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
May 5, 2010
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 Page 2 
Part III Summary
16 Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result ................... 16
• If line 16 is a gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. 
Then go to line 17 below. 
• If line 16 is a  loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete 
line 22. 
• If line 16 is zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form
1040NR, line 14. Then go to line 22. 
17 Are lines 15 and 16 both gains? 
Yes. Go to line 18. 
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22. 
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the 
instructions ............................. a 18 
19 Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on page 
D-9 of the instructions ......................... a 19 
20 Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions for Form
1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below. 
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 
below. 
21 If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller  of: 
• The loss on line 16 or 
• ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) } ............... 21 (                                   )
Note.  When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers. 
22 Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete  the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions for Form
1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). 
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. 
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 
750
✔
450
✔
Page 118 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 121 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) Ð chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay Ð chapter 18, and
• Student loan interest you payÐchapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V
below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapters 7 and 8 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims or awards to whistleblowers
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 119

Page 122 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your filing status is married filing sepa- • Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, you lived with your spouse at anyrately, you lived with your spouse at any
time during the year, and your modifiedtime during the year, and your modified17. AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make aAGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a
Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGIRoth IRA contribution if your modified AGI
is $10,000 or more.is $10,000 or more.
Individual See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later.
Conversions to Roth IRAs. The modified
Retirement AGI and filing status requirements for converting Remindersa traditional IRA to a Roth IRA are eliminated.
Also, for any 2010 rollover from an IRA otherArrangements Contributions to both traditional and Roththan a Roth IRA to a Roth IRA, any amounts that
IRAs.  For information on your combined con-would be included as income will be included in tribution limit if you contribute to both traditional(IRAs) income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. You and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditionalcan choose to include the entire amount in in- IRAs under How Much Can Be Contributed?come in 2010. later.What's New for 2010 Catch-up contributions in certain employer Statement of required minimum distribution.bankruptcies. The provision for additional If a minimum distribution is required from yourDue date for contributions and withdrawals. catch-up contributions in certain employer bank- IRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that heldContributions can be made to your IRA for a ruptcies does not apply for 2010 or later years. the IRA at the end of the preceding year mustyear at any time during the year or by the due
either report the amount of the required mini-Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs).date for filing your return for that year, not includ-
mum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it forThe provision for tax-free distributions from IRAsing extensions. Because Emancipation Day,
you. The report or offer must include the date byfor charitable purposes does not apply for 2010Saturday, April 16, 2011, a legal holiday in the
which the amount must be distributed. The re-or later years.District of Columbia, will be observed on Friday,
port is due January 31 of the year in which theApril 15, 2011, the due date for making contribu- At the time this publication went to minimum distribution is required. It can be pro-tions for 2010 to your IRA is April 18, 2011. See print, Congress was considering legis- vided with the year-end fair market value state-When Can Contributions Be Made? lation that would extend qualified chari-
CAUTION
! ment that you normally get each year. No reportThere is a 6% excise tax on excess contribu- table distributions from IRAs. To find out if this is required for IRAs of owners who have died.tions not withdrawn by the due date (including legislation was enacted, and for more details, goextensions) for your return. You will not have to to www.irs.gov/formspubs. IRA interest. Although interest earned frompay the 6% tax if any 2010 excess contributions your IRA is generally not taxed in the yearare withdrawn by the due date of your return earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Tax on your(including extensions). See Excess Contribu- traditional IRA is generally deferred until youtions under What Acts Result in Penalties or take a distribution. Do not report this interest onAdditional Taxes? What's New for 2011 your tax return as tax-exempt interest.
Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- Form 8606.  To designate contributions asModified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-butions increased. For 2010, if you were cov- nondeductible, you must file Form 8606, Nonde-butions increased. For 2011, if you are cov-ered by a retirement plan at work, your ductible IRAs.ered by a retirement plan at work, yourdeduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is
deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA isreduced (phased out) if your modified AGI is: Disaster-related tax relief. Special rules ap-reduced (phased out) if your modified AGI is: ply to the use of retirement funds (including• More than $89,000 but less than $109,000
• More than $90,000 but less than $110,000 IRAs) by qualified individuals who suffered anfor a married couple filing a joint return or
for a married couple filing a joint return or economic loss as a result of:a qualifying widow(er),
a qualifying widow(er), • The storms that began on May 4, 2007, in• More than $56,000 but less than $66,000
• More than $56,000 but less than $66,000 the Kansas disaster area, orfor a single individual or head of house-
for a single individual or head of house-hold, or • The severe storms in the Midwestern dis-hold, or aster areas in 2008.• Less than $10,000 for a married individual
• Less than $10,000 for a married individualfiling a separate return. For more information on these special rules seefiling a separate return. Tax Relief for Kansas Disaster Area  and TaxIf you either lived with your spouse or file a Relief for Midwestern Disaster Areas in chapterIf you either live with your spouse or file a jointjoint return, and your spouse was covered by a 4 of Publication 590.return, and your spouse is covered by a retire-retirement plan at work, but you were not, your
ment plan at work, but you are not, your deduc-deduction is phased out if your modified AGI is The term ª50 or olderº is used severaltion is phased out if your modified AGI is moremore than $167,000 but less than $177,000. If times in this chapter. It refers to an IRAthan $169,000 but less than $179,000. If youryour modified AGI is $177,000 or more, you owner who is age 50 or older by the
TIPmodified AGI is $179,000 or more, you cannotcannot take a deduction for contributions to a end of the tax year.take a deduction for contributions to a traditionaltraditional IRA. See How Much Can You De-
IRA.duct? later.
Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributionsModified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions
increased. For 2011, your Roth IRA contribu-increased. For 2010, your Roth IRA contribu- Introductiontion limit is reduced (phased out) in the followingtion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is asituations.situations.
personal savings plan that gives you tax advan-• Your filing status is married filing jointly or• Your filing status is married filing jointly or tages for setting aside money for your retire-qualifying widow(er) and your modifiedqualifying widow(er) and your modified ment.AGI is at least $169,000. You cannotAGI is at least $167,000. You cannot This chapter discusses the following topics.make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-
fied AGI is $179,000 or more.fied AGI is $177,000 or more. • The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA
that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA).• Your filing status is single, head of house-• Your filing status is single, head of house-
hold, or married filing separately and youhold, or married filing separately and you • The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-
did not live with your spouse at any time indid not live with your spouse at any time in ible contributions and tax-free distribu-
2011 and your modified AGI is at least2010 and your modified AGI is at least tions.
$107,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA$105,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA
contribution if your modified AGI iscontribution if your modified AGI is Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and
$122,000 or more.$120,000 or more. Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees
Page 120 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 123 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For • The deduction for contributions made on Qualified reservist repayments. If you are
your behalf to retirement plans, and (or were) a member of a reserve component andmore information on these plans and employ-
you were ordered or called to active duty afterees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part of • The deduction allowed for one-half of your September 11, 2001, you may be able to con-these plans, see Publications 560 and 590. self-employment taxes. tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to anyFor information about contributions, deduc-
qualified reservist distributions you received.tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and Compensation includes earnings from You can make these repayment contributionsother transactions for 2011, see Publication 590. self-employment even if they are not subject to even if they would cause your total contributionsself-employment tax because of your religious to the IRA to be more than the general limit onbeliefs.Useful Items contributions. To be eligible to make these re-
You may want to see: Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA pur- payment contributions, you must have received
poses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA or
Publication Forces, your compensation includes any non- from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similar
taxable combat pay you receive. arrangement.❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small
For more information, see Qualified reservistBusiness What is not compensation? Compensation repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements does not include any of the following items. uted? in chapter 1 of Publication 590.
(IRAs) • Earnings and profits from property, such Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-
as rental income, interest income, and div- tional IRA reduce your limit for contri-Form (and Instructions) idend income. butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs,
CAUTION
!
❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans later.)• Pension or annuity income.(including IRAs) and Other
General limit. For 2010, the most that can beTax-Favored Accounts • Deferred compensation received (com-
contributed to your traditional IRA generally ispensation payments postponed from a❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs the smaller of the following amounts.past year).
• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).• Income from a partnership for which you
do not provide services that are a material • Your taxable compensation (defined ear-income-producing factor. lier) for the year.Traditional IRAs • Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) This is the most that can be contributed regard-payments reported on Schedule SE (Form less of whether the contributions are to one orIn this chapter the original IRA (sometimes 1040), line 1(b). more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of thecalled an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to
contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde-• Any amounts (other than combat pay) youas a ªtraditional IRA.º A traditional IRA is any
ductible Contributions, later.) Qualified reservistexclude from income, such as foreignIRA that is not a Roth IRA or a SIMPLE IRA.Two
repayments do not affect this limit.earned income and housing costs.advantages of a traditional IRA are:
• You may be able to deduct some or all of Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old andyour contributions to it, depending on your single, earned $24,000 in 2010. Her IRA contri-When and How Can acircumstances, and butions for 2010 are limited to $5,000.Traditional IRA Be• Generally, amounts in your IRA, including
Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu-Opened?earnings and gains, are not taxed until
dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2010.they are distributed. You can open a traditional IRA at any time. His IRA contributions for 2010 are limited to
However, the time for making contributions for $3,500, the amount of his compensation.
any year is limited. See When Can ContributionsWho Can Open Spousal IRA limit. For 2010, if you file a jointBe Made, later. return and your taxable compensation is lessa Traditional IRA?   You can open different kinds of IRAs with a than that of your spouse, the most that can bevariety of organizations. You can open an IRA at contributed for the year to your IRA is theYou can open and make contributions to a tradi- a bank or other financial institution or with a smaller of the following amounts.tional IRA if: mutual fund or life insurance company. You can
also open an IRA through your stockbroker. Any• You (or, if you file a joint return, your 1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code require-spouse) received taxable compensation 2. The total compensation includible in thements.during the year, and gross income of both you and your spouse
• You were not age 701/2 by the end of the for the year, reduced by the following twoKinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditional
year. amounts.IRA can be an individual retirement account or
annuity. It can be part of either a simplified a. Your spouse's IRA contribution for theemployee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-What is compensation? Generally, compen- year to a traditional IRA.ployee association trust account.sation is what you earn from working. Compen-
b. Any contribution for the year to a Rothsation includes wages, salaries, tips,
IRA on behalf of your spouse.professional fees, bonuses, and other amounts How Much Can Be
you receive for providing personal services. The Contributed? This means that the total combined contribu-IRS treats as compensation any amount prop- tions that can be made for the year to your IRAerly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen- There are limits and other rules that affect the and your spouse's IRA can be as much assation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, amount that can be contributed to a traditional $10,000 ($11,000 if only one of you is 50 orprovided that amount is reduced by any amount IRA. These limits and other rules are explained older, or $12,000 if both of you are 50 or older).properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). below.
Scholarship and fellowship payments are
When Can ContributionsCommunity property laws. Except as dis-compensation for this purpose only if shown in
cussed later under Spousal IRA limit , eachbox 1 of Form W-2. Be Made?spouse figures his or her limit separately, usingCompensation also includes commissions
his or her own compensation. This is the ruleand taxable alimony and separate maintenance As soon as you open your traditional IRA, contri-even in states with community property laws.payments. butions can be made to it through your chosen
sponsor (trustee or other administrator). Contri-Self-employment income. If you are Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis- butions must be in the form of money (cash,self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), sions paid in connection with your traditional IRA check, or money order). Property cannot be con-compensation is the net earnings from your are subject to the contribution limit. tributed.trade or business (provided your personal serv-
ices are a material income-producing factor) re- Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative fees Contributions must be made by due date.
duced by the total of: are not subject to the contribution limit. Contributions can be made to your traditional
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 121

Page 124 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be eligible to claim a credit forTable 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by
contributions to your traditional IRA.Retirement Plan at Work For more information, see chapter 37.
TIP
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI
affects the amount of your deduction.
Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative fees
that are billed separately and paid in connection
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... with your traditional IRA are not deductible as
IRA contributions. However, they may be de- $56,000 or less a full deduction.single ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduction
on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.more than $56,000 a partial deduction.or but less than $66,000
Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-head of household $66,000 or more no deduction. sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as
such, are deductible subject to the limits. $89,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly
Full deduction. If neither you nor your spousemore than $89,000 a partial deduction. or was covered for any part of the year by anbut less than $109,000
employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-qualifying widow(er) $109,000 or more no deduction. tion for total contributions to one or more tradi-
tional IRAs of up to the lesser of:less than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing
• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inseparately2
$10,000 or more no deduction. 2010).
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). • 100% of your compensation.
2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose
This limit is reduced by any contributions made(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the ªSingleº column).
to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.
Spousal IRA. In the case of a marriedIRA for a year at any time during the year or by contribution before the contribution is actually
couple with unequal compensation who file athe due date for filing your return for that year, made. Generally, the contribution must be made
joint return, the deduction for contributions to thenot including extensions. by the due date of your return, not including
traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-extensions.Age 701/2 rule. Contributions cannot be made sation is limited to the lesser of the following
to your traditional IRA for the year in which you amounts.Contributions not required. You do not havereach age 701/2 or for any later year. to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax 1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inYou attain age 70 1/2 on the date that is 6
year, even if you can. 2010).calendar months after the 70th anniversary of
your birth. If you were born on or before June 30, 2. The total compensation includible in the1940, you cannot contribute for 2010 or any later How Much Can You gross income of both spouses for the yearyear. reduced by the following three amounts.Deduct?
Designating year for which contribution is a. The IRA deduction for the year of theGenerally, you can deduct the lesser of:made. If an amount is contributed to your spouse with the greater compensation.traditional IRA between January 1 and April 18, • The contributions to your traditional IRAyou should tell the sponsor which year (the cur- b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-for the year, orrent year or the previous year) the contribution is tion for the year made on behalf of the
• The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,for. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it is spouse with the greater compensation.
for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the if it applies). c. Any contributions for the year to a RothIRS, that the contribution is for the current year However, if you or your spouse was covered by IRA on behalf of the spouse with the(the year the sponsor received it). greater compensation.an employer retirement plan, you may not be
able to deduct this amount. See Limit If CoveredFiling before a contribution is made. You
This limit is reduced by any contributions to aby Employer Plan, later.can file your return claiming a traditional IRA
501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with
the lesser compensation.Table 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
rated (and did not remarry) before the end of theIf you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine
year, you cannot deduct any contributions toif your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
your spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-
ration, you can deduct only contributions to your
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... own IRA. Your deductions are subject to the
rules for single individuals.single, any amount a full deduction.
head of household, or Covered by an employer retirement plan. Ifqualifying widow(er) you or your spouse was covered by an employer
retirement plan at any time during the year formarried filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
which contributions were made, your deductionseparately with a spouse who is
may be further limited. This is discussed laternot covered by a plan at work
under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limits
$167,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a on the amount you can deduct do not affect the
spouse who is covered by a plan amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-more than $167,000 a partial deduction.at work ductible Contributions, later.but less than $177,000
$177,000 or more no deduction. Are You Covered by an Employer
less than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a Plan?
spouse who is covered by a plan $10,000 or more no deduction. The Form W-2 you receive from your employerat work2
has a box used to indicate whether you were
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). covered for the year. The ªRetirement planº box2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year. should be checked if you were covered.
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)Worksheet 17-1. Figuring Your above.Modified AGI Keep for Your Records
2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for traditional IRA purposes. ginning of the year will not provide more
than $1,800 per year at retirement.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38, or
Form 1040A, line 22, figured without taking into account the amount
from Form 1040, line 32, or Form 1040A, line 17 ............ . 1. Limit If Covered by Employer Plan
2. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33,
If either you or your spouse was covered by anor Form 1040A, line 18 ............................. . 2.
employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to
3. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040, only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-
line 35 ........................................ . 3. tion at all, depending on your income and your
filing status.4. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Your deduction begins to decrease (phaseForm 2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .............. . 4. out) when your income rises above a certain
amount and is eliminated altogether when it5. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ... . 5.
reaches a higher amount. These amounts vary
6. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 6. depending on your filing status.
To determine if your deduction is subject to7. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form phaseout, you must determine your modified8839, line 26 .................................... . 7. adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
tus. See Filing status  and Modified adjusted8. Add lines 1 through 7. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA
gross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-1purposes ...................................... . 8.  
or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.
Social security recipients. Instead of using
Table 17-1 or Table 17-2, use the worksheets inReservists and volunteer firefighters should No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for
Appendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, allalso see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov- a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if
of the following apply.ered, later. you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the
If you are not certain whether you were cov- accrual. • You received social security benefits.
ered by your employer's retirement plan, you • You received taxable compensation.should ask your employer.
Situations in Which You Are Not • Contributions were made to your tradi-
Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de- Covered tional IRA.
duction, federal judges are covered by an em- • You or your spouse was covered by anUnless you are covered under another employerployer retirement plan. employer retirement plan.plan, you are not covered by an employer plan if
you are in one of the situations described below. Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-
For Which Year(s) Are You tion, your nondeductible contribution, and theSocial security or railroad retirement. Cov- taxable portion, if any, of your social securityCovered? erage under social security or railroad retire- benefits.ment is not coverage under an employerSpecial rules apply to determine the tax years retirement plan.for which you are covered by an employer plan. Deduction phaseout. If you were covered by
Benefits from a previous employer's plan.These rules differ depending on whether the an employer retirement plan and you did not
If you receive retirement benefits from a previ-plan is a defined contribution plan or a defined receive any social security retirement benefits,
ous employer's plan, you are not covered by thatbenefit plan. your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi-
plan. nated depending on your filing status and modi-
Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account- fied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.Reservists. If the only reason you participate
ing period you use to keep records and report in a plan is because you are a member of a If your spouse is covered. If you are notincome and expenses on your income tax re- reserve unit of the armed forces, you may not be covered by an employer retirement plan, butturn. For almost all people, the tax year is the covered by the plan. You are not covered by the your spouse is, and you did not receive anycalendar year. plan if both of the following conditions are met. social security benefits, your IRA deduction may
be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on1. The plan you participate in is establishedDefined contribution plan. Generally, you your filing status and modified AGI as shown infor its employees by:are covered by a defined contribution plan for a Table 17-2.tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated a. The United States, Filing status. Your filing status depends pri-to your account for the plan year that ends with
marily on your marital status. For this purpose,or within that tax year. b. A state or political subdivision of a
you need to know if your filing status is single orA defined contribution plan is a plan that state, or
head of household, married filing jointly or quali-provides for a separate account for each person c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) fying widow(er), or married filing separately. Ifcovered by the plan. Types of defined contribu- above. you need more information on filing status, seetion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-
chapter 2.nus plans, and money purchase pension plans. 2. You did not serve more than 90 days on
Lived apart from spouse. If you did not liveactive duty during the year (not countingDefined benefit plan. If you are eligible to with your spouse at any time during the year andduty for training).participate in your employer's defined benefit you file a separate return, your filing status, forplan for the plan year that ends within your tax this purpose, is single.Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason youyear, you are covered by the plan. This rule participate in a plan is because you are a volun- Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). Howapplies even if you: teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the you figure your modified AGI depends on• Declined to participate in the plan, plan. You are not covered by the plan if both of whether you are filing Form 1040 or Formthe following conditions are met. 1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for• Did not make a required contribution, or
2010 and received a distribution from your IRA1. The plan you participate in is established• Did not perform the minimum service re- in 2010, see Publication 590.for its employees by:quired to accrue a benefit for the year.
Do not assume that your modified AGIa. The United States,A defined benefit plan is any plan that is not a is the same as your compensation.
defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plans b. A state or political subdivision of a Your modified AGI may include income
CAUTION
!
include pension plans and annuity plans. state, or in addition to your compensation (discussed
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

Page 126 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
earlier), such as interest, dividends, and income Reporting Deductible Inherited IRAsfrom IRA distributions. Contributions
If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called aForm 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person orthe amount on the page 1 ªadjusted gross in- on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A, entity the owner chooses to receive the benefitscomeº line without taking into account any of the enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of afollowing amounts. deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ. traditional IRA must include in their gross in-
come any taxable distributions they receive.• IRA deduction.
Nondeductible• Student loan interest deduction. Inherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi-
Contributions tional IRA from your spouse, you generally have• Domestic production activities deduction.
the following three choices. You can:• Foreign earned income exclusion. Although your deduction for IRA contributions
1. Treat it as your own IRA by designatingmay be reduced or eliminated, contributions can• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction. yourself as the account owner.be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if
• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- it applies, the spousal IRA limit. The difference 2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over intoest shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In- between your total permitted contributions and your IRA, or to the extent it is taxable, intoterest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings your IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductible a:Bonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers With contribution.
Qualified Higher Education Expenses). a. Qualified employer plan,
Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-2010, he was covered by a retirement plan atbenefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified tion 403(a) plan),work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGIAdoption Expenses. was $68,000. Mike made a $5,000 IRA contribu- c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section
This is your modified AGI. tion for 2010. Because he was covered by a 403(b) plan), or
retirement plan and his modified AGI was over d. Deferred compensation plan of a stateAt the time this publication went to $66,000, he cannot deduct his $5,000 IRA con- or local government (section 457 plan).print, Congress was considering legis- tribution. He must designate this contribution as
lation that would extend the deduction a nondeductible contribution by reporting it on
CAUTION
! 3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary ratherfor tuition and fees. To find out if this legislation Form 8606, as explained next. than treating the IRA as your own.was enacted, and for more details, go to www.
Form 8606. To designate contributions asirs.gov/formspubs. Treating it as your own. You will be con-nondeductible, you must file Form 8606. sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as yourForm 1040A. If you file Form 1040A, You do not have to designate a contribution own if:refigure the amount on the page 1 ªadjusted as nondeductible until you file your tax return.
gross incomeº line without taking into account When you file, you can even designate other- • Contributions (including rollover contribu-
any of the following amounts. wise deductible contributions as nondeductible. tions) are made to the inherited IRA, or
You must file Form 8606 to report nonde-• IRA deduction. • You do not take the required minimum dis-ductible contributions even if you do not have to tribution for a year as a beneficiary of the• Student loan interest deduction. file a tax return for the year. IRA.
• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- A Form 8606 is not used for the year You will only be considered to have chosen toest shown on Form 8815. that you make a rollover from a quali- treat the IRA as your own if:fied retirement plan to a traditional IRA
CAUTION
!This is your modified AGI. and the rollover includes nontaxable amounts. • You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA,
In those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for andAt the time this publication went to the year you take a distribution from that IRA.print, Congress was considering legis- • You have an unlimited right to withdrawSee Form 8606  under Distributions Fully orlation that would extend the deduction amounts from it.
CAUTION
!Partly Taxable, later.for tuition and fees. To find out if this legislation
was enacted, and for more details, go to www. However, if you receive a distribution fromFailure to report nondeductible contribu-
irs.gov/formspubs. your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll thattions. If you do not report nondeductible con-
distribution over into your own IRA within thetributions, all of the contributions to yourBoth contributions for 2010 and distribu- 60-day time limit, as long as the distribution istraditional IRA will be treated as deductible con-tions in 2010. If all three of the following apply, not a required distribution, even if you are nottributions when withdrawn. All distributions fromany IRA distributions you received in 2010 may the sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse'syour IRA will be taxed unless you can show, withbe partly tax free and partly taxable. IRA.satisfactory evidence, that nondeductible contri-
butions were made.• You received distributions in 2010 from Inherited from someone other than spouse.one or more traditional IRAs. Penalty for overstatement. If you over- If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone otherstate the amount of nondeductible contributions• You made contributions to a traditional than your deceased spouse, you cannot treaton your Form 8606 for any tax year, you mustIRA for 2010. the inherited IRA as your own. This means thatpay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement, you cannot make any contributions to the IRA. It• Some of those contributions may be non- unless it was due to reasonable cause. also means you cannot roll over any amountsdeductible contributions. into or out of the inherited IRA. However, youPenalty for failure to file Form 8606. You
If this is your situation, you must figure the tax- can make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as longwill have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a
able part of the traditional IRA distribution before as the IRA into which amounts are being movedrequired Form 8606, unless you can prove that
you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you is set up and maintained in the name of thethe failure was due to reasonable cause.
can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxable deceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as
beneficiary.Part of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590. Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-
tions. As long as contributions are within the For more information, see the discussion ofIf at least one of the above does not apply, contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains inherited IRAs  under Rollover From One IRAfigure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1 on contributions (deductible or nondeductible) Into Another, later.on this page. will be taxed until they are distributed. See When
Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, later. Can You Move RetirementHow to figure your reduced IRA deduction.
You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your Plan Assets?either Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible
worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590. contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the You can transfer, tax free, assets (money or
Also, the instructions for Form 1040 and Form nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus property) from other retirement plans (including
1040A include similar worksheets that you may any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct- traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You can
be able to use instead. ible contributions. make the following kinds of transfers.
Page 124 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 127 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Transfers from one trustee to another.  The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it to
where the failure to do so would be against receive a rollover contribution. You must with-• Rollovers. equity or good conscience, such as in the event draw the IRA assets within a certain period. For
• Transfers incident to a divorce. of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond more information, see Publication 590.
your reasonable control. For more information,
see Publication 590.Transfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi- Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report any
tions, you can move assets from a traditional Extension of rollover period. If an amount rollover from one traditional IRA to the same orIRA or from a designated Roth account to a Roth distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,IRA. You can also move assets from a qualified qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.retirement plan to a Roth IRA. See Can You deposit at any time during the 60-day period Enter the total amount of the distribution onMove Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  under Roth allowed for a rollover, special rules extend the Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. IfIRAs, later. rollover period. For more information, see Publi-
the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, orcation 590.
Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter
zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A,More information. For more information onTrustee-to-Trustee Transfer
line 11b. If the total distribution was not rolledrollovers, see Publication 590.
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from over, enter the taxable portion of the part that
one trustee directly to another, either at your was not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or
request or at the trustee's request, is not a rollo- Form 1040A, line 11b. Put ªRolloverº next toRollover From One IRA Into
ver. Because there is no distribution to you, the Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b.Anothertransfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, it See the forms instructions.
is not affected by the 1-year waiting period re- You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the If you rolled over the distribution into a quali-quired between rollovers, discussed later under assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest fied plan (other than an IRA) or you make theRollover From One IRA Into Another . For infor- them within 60 days in the same or another rollover in 2011, attach a statement explainingmation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire- traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you what you did.ment plans other than IRAs, see Publication cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an
590. IRA.
Rollover From Employer's PlanWaiting period between rollovers. Gener-
Into an IRAally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part ofRollovers
a distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot, You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or partGenerally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover of an eligible rollover distribution you receiveyou of cash or other assets from one retirement of any later distribution from that same IRA. You from your (or your deceased spouse's):plan that you contribute (roll over) to another also cannot make a tax-free rollover of any
retirement plan. The contribution to the second amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe- • Employer's qualified pension,retirement plan is called a ªrollover contribution.º riod, from the IRA into which you made the profit-sharing or stock bonus plan,
tax-free rollover.
• Annuity plan,Note. An amount rolled over tax free from The 1-year period begins on the date you
one retirement plan to another is generally in- receive the IRA distribution, not on the date you • Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)cludible in income when it is distributed from the roll it over into an IRA. plan), orsecond plan.
• Governmental deferred compensationExample. You have two traditional IRAs,
plan (section 457 plan).Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. You IRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover of
can roll over amounts from the following plans a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditional
A qualified plan is one that meets the require-into a traditional IRA: IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of the
ments of the Internal Revenue Code.distribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rollover• A traditional IRA, of any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into
• An employer's qualified retirement plan for another traditional IRA. Eligible rollover distribution. Generally, anits employees, However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3 eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofdoes not prevent you from making a tax-free• A deferred compensation plan of a state or all or part of the balance to your credit in arollover from IRA-2 into any other traditionallocal government (section 457 plan), or qualified retirement plan except the following.IRA. This is because you have not, within the
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section last year, rolled over, tax free, any distribution 1. A required minimum distribution (explained403(b) plan). from IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover into later under When Must You Withdraw IRA
IRA-2. Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions).
Treatment of rollovers. You cannot deduct a Exception. For an exception for distribu- 2. A hardship distribution.rollover contribution, but you must report the tions from failed financial institutions, see Publi-
3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-rollover distribution on your tax return as dis- cation 590.
odic distributions paid at least once a yearcussed later under Reporting rollovers from
over:Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets fromIRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-
a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of theployer plans. a. Your lifetime or life expectancy,withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The
amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex- b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of youKinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.
cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible and your beneficiary, orYou may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-
contributions). The amount you keep may betion from your traditional IRA into a qualified c. A period of 10 years or more.subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-
butions, discussed later under What Acts Resultings Fund (for federal employees), deferred 4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu-in Penalties or Additional Taxes.compensation plans of state or local govern- tions or excess deferrals, and any incomements (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltered allocable to the excess, or of excess an-Required distributions. Amounts that mustannuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of nual additions and any allocable gains.be distributed during a particular year under thethe distribution that you can roll over is the part
required distribution rules (discussed later) arethat would otherwise be taxable (includible in 5. A loan treated as a distribution because it
not eligible for rollover treatment.your income). Qualified plans may, but are not does not satisfy certain requirements ei-
required to, accept such rollovers. ther when made or later (such as uponInherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA default), unless the participant's accruedfrom your spouse, you generally can roll it over, benefits are reduced (offset) to repay theTime limit for making a rollover contribution. or you can choose to make the inherited IRA loan.You generally must make the rollover contribu- your own. See Treating it as your own, earlier.tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the 6. Dividends on employer securities.distribution from your traditional IRA or your em- Not inherited from spouse. If you inherit a
7. The cost of life insurance coverage.ployer's plan. traditional IRA from someone other than your
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 125

Page 128 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Any nontaxable amounts that you roll more information. You do not include in gross • Any additional information needed to
over into your traditional IRA become make the transfer.income any part of a distribution from a tradi-
part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs. tional IRA that is a return of your basis, as
TIP
To recover your basis when you take distribu- discussed later. Reporting a recharacterization. If you electtions from your IRA, you must complete Form You must file Form 8606 to report 2010 con- to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form versions from traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRAs contribution to another IRA, you must report the8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable, to a Roth IRA in 2010 (unless you recharacter- recharacterization on your tax return as directedlater. ized the entire amount) and to figure the amount by Form 8606 and its instructions. You must
to include in income. treat the contribution as having been made toRollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct If you must include any amount in your gross the second IRA.transfer from a deceased employee's qualified income, you may have to increase your with-pension, profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, an- holding or make estimated tax payments. Seenuity plan, tax-sheltered annuity (section When Can You Withdrawchapter 4.403(b)) plan, or governmental deferred compen- or Use IRA Assets?sation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to
receive the distribution on your behalf can be There are rules limiting use of your IRA assetsRecharacterizationstreated as an eligible rollover distribution if you and distributions from it. Violation of the rulesare the designated beneficiary of the plan and You may be able to treat a contribution made to generally results in additional taxes in the year ofnot the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated one type of IRA as having been made to a violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties oras an inherited IRA. For more information about Additional Taxes, later.different type of IRA. This is called recharacter-inherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier. izing the contribution. More detailed information
Contributions returned before the due dateReporting rollovers from employer plans. is in Publication 590.
of return. If you made IRA contributions inEnter the total distribution (before income tax or
2010, you can withdraw them tax free by the dueother deductions were withheld) on Form 1040, How to recharacterize a contribution. To
date of your return. If you have an extension ofline 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amount recharacterize a contribution, you generally time to file your return, you can withdraw themshould be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. From must have the contribution transferred from the tax free by the extended due date. You can dothis amount, subtract any contributions (usually first IRA (the one to which it was made) to the this if, for each contribution you withdraw, bothshown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax- second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If the of the following conditions apply.able to you when made. From that result, sub- transfer is made by the due date (including ex-tract the amount that was rolled over either tensions) for your tax return for the year during • You did not take a deduction for the contri-directly or within 60 days of receiving the distri- which the contribution was made, you can elect bution.bution. Enter the remaining amount, even if to treat the contribution as having been originally • You withdraw any interest or other incomezero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, made to the second IRA instead of to the first earned on the contribution. You can takeline 12b. Also, enter ``Rollover'' next to Form IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, you1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. into account any loss on the contributionmust do all three of the following. while it was in the IRA when calculating
• Include in the transfer any net income allo- the amount that must be withdrawn. If
cable to the contribution. If there was a there was a loss, the net income earnedTransfers Incident to Divorce
loss, the net income you must transfer on the contribution may be a negative
If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred may be a negative amount. amount.
from your spouse or former spouse to you by a • Report the recharacterization on your taxdivorce or separate maintenance decree or a return for the year during which the contri-written document related to such a decree, the Note. To calculate the amount you mustbution was made.interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the withdraw, see Publication 590.
transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is • Treat the contribution as having been Earnings includible in income. You musttax free. For detailed information, see Publica- made to the second IRA on the date that it include in income any earnings on the contribu-tion 590. was actually made to the first IRA. tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-
come for the year in which you made the
contributions, not in the year in which you with-No deduction allowed. You cannot deductConverting From Any Traditional draw them.the contribution to the first IRA. Any net incomeIRA to a Roth IRA you transfer with the recharacterized contribu- Generally, except for any part of a with-tion is treated as earned in the second IRA. drawal that is a return of nondeductibleAllowable conversions. You can withdraw all contributions (basis), any withdrawal ofRequired notifications. To recharacterize
CAUTION
!or part of the assets from a traditional IRA and your contributions after the due date (or ex-a contribution, you must notify both the trustee ofreinvest them (within 60 days) in a Roth IRA. tended due date) of your return will be treated asthe first IRA (the one to which the contributionThe amount that you withdraw and timely con- a taxable distribution. Excess contributions canwas actually made) and the trustee of the sec-tribute (convert) to the Roth IRA is called a also be recovered tax free as discussed underond IRA (the one to which the contribution isconversion contribution. If properly (and timely) What Acts Result in Penalties or Additionalbeing moved) that you have elected to treat therolled over, the 10% additional tax on early distri- Taxes, later.contribution as having been made to the secondbutions will not apply.
IRA rather than the first. You must make theRequired distributions. You cannot convert Early distributions tax. The 10% additionalnotifications by the date of the transfer. Only oneamounts that must be distributed from your tax on distributions made before you reach agenotification is required if both IRAs are main-traditional IRA for a particular year (including the 591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw-tained by the same trustee. The notification(s)calendar year in which you reach age 70 1/2) als of your contributions. However, the distribu-must include all of the following information.under the required distribution rules (discussed tion of interest or other income must be reported• The type and amount of the contribution tolater). on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali-the first IRA that is to be recharacterized. fies as an exception to the age 59 1/2 rule, it willIncome. You must include in your gross in- be subject to this tax.• The date on which the contribution wascome distributions from a traditional IRA that
made to the first IRA and the year foryou would have had to include in income if you
which it was made.had not converted them into a Roth IRA. These When Must You Withdraw
amounts are normally included in income on • A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to IRA Assets? (Requiredyour return for the year that you converted them transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer thefrom a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. However, Minimum Distributions)amount of the contribution and any netfor 2010 conversions any amounts you must income (or loss) allocable to the contribu- You cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef-include in income are included in income in tion to the trustee of the second IRA. initely. Eventually they must be distributed. Ifequal amounts in 2011 and 2012 unless you
• The name of the trustee of the first IRA there are no distributions, or if the distributionschoose to include the amounts in income in
and the name of the trustee of the second are not large enough, you may have to pay a2010. See Special rules for 2010 conversions
50% excise tax on the amount not distributed asfrom IRAs to Roth IRAs  in Publication 590 for IRA.
Page 126 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 129 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi- Although a conversion of a traditional you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-
cient Distributions), later. The requirements for IRA is considered a rollover for Roth ter 4.
distributing IRA funds differ depending on IRA purposes, it is not an exception to
CAUTION
! IRA distributions delivered outside thewhether you are the IRA owner or the benefi- the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA United States. In general, if you are a U.S.ciary of a decedent's IRA. are taxable in the year you receive them. Con- citizen or resident alien and your home addressversion distributions are includible in your gross is outside the United States or its possessions,income subject to this rule and the special rulesRequired minimum distribution. The you cannot choose exemption from withholdingfor conversions explained in Publication 590.amount that must be distributed each year is on distributions from your traditional IRA.referred to as the required minimum distribution.
Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi- Reporting taxable distributions on your re-tional IRAs that you include in income are taxedRequired distributions not eligible for rollo- turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-as ordinary income.ver. Amounts that must be distributed (re- ing early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, or
quired minimum distributions) during a particular Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required onNo special treatment. In figuring your tax,year are not eligible for rollover treatment. Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). Ifyou cannot use the 10-year tax option or capital only part of the distribution is taxable, enter thegain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu-IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi- total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or Formtions from qualified retirement plans.tional IRA, you must generally start receiving 1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on Form
distributions from your IRA by April 1 of the year 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. You
following the year in which you reach age 70 1/2. cannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ.Distributions Fully or PartlyApril 1 of the year following the year in which you Taxablereach age 70 1/2 is referred to as the required What Acts Result inbeginning date. Distributions from your traditional IRA may be Penalties or Additionalfully or partly taxable, depending on whetherDistributions by the required beginning date. your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu- Taxes?You must receive at least a minimum amount for tions.each year starting with the year you reach age The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for
701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not) Fully taxable. If only deductible contributions retirement savings can be offset by additional
receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year, were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if taxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules.
then you must receive distributions for your 701/2 you have more than one), you have no basis in There are additions to the regular tax for
year by April 1 of the next year. your IRA. Because you have no basis in your using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions.
If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2, IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when There are also additional taxes for the following
but before April 1 of the next year, no minimum received. See Reporting taxable distributions on activities.
distribution is required because death occurred your return, later. • Investing in collectibles.before the required beginning date. Partly taxable. If you made nondeductible • Making excess contributions.Even if you begin receiving distribu- contributions or rolled over any after-tax
tions before you attain age 70 1/2, you amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, you • Taking early distributions.
must begin calculating and receiving have a cost basis (investment in the contract)
CAUTION
! • Allowing excess amounts to accumulaterequired minimum distributions by your required equal to the amount of those contributions. (failing to take required distributions).beginning date. These nondeductible contributions are not taxed
when they are distributed to you. They are a There are penalties for overstating theDistributions after the required beginning return of your investment in your IRA. amount of nondeductible contributions and fordate. The required minimum distribution for Only the part of the distribution that repre- failure to file a Form 8606, if required.any year after the year you turn 70 1/2 must be sents nondeductible contributions and rolledmade by December 31 of that later year. over after-tax amounts (your cost basis) is tax
free. If nondeductible contributions have been Prohibited TransactionsBeneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a made or after-tax amounts have been rolleddecedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-distributions from that IRA generally depend on nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly of proper use of your traditional IRA by you, yourwhether the IRA owner died before or after the deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if beneficiary, or any disqualified person.required beginning date for distributions. there are any). Until all of your basis has been Disqualified persons include your fiduciarydistributed, each distribution is partly nontaxable and members of your family (spouse, ancestor,More information. For more information, in- and partly taxable. lineal descendent, and any spouse of a linealcluding how to figure your minimum required descendent).distribution each year and how to figure your Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606 The following are examples of prohibitedrequired distribution if you are a beneficiary of a and attach it to your return if you receive a transactions with a traditional IRA.decedent's IRA, see Publication 590. distribution from a traditional IRA and have ever
made nondeductible contributions or rolled over • Borrowing money from it.
after-tax amounts to any of your traditional IRAs.Are Distributions Taxable? • Selling property to it.Using the form, you will figure the nontaxable
distributions for 2010 and your total IRA basis for • Receiving unreasonable compensation forIn general, distributions from a traditional IRA 2010 and earlier years. managing it.are taxable in the year you receive them.
• Using it as security for a loan.Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from but you are not required to file an income tax • Buying property for personal use (presenttraditional IRAs being taxable in the year you return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to or future) with IRA funds.receive them are: the IRS at the time and place you would other-
• Rollovers, wise file an income tax return. Effect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or
• Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis- your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-Distributions reported on Form 1099-R. Ifcussed earlier, and action in connection with your traditional IRAyou receive a distribution from your traditional
account at any time during the year, the accountIRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, Distributions• The return of nondeductible contributions,
stops being an IRA as of the first day of thatFrom Pensions, Annuities, Retirement ordiscussed later under Distributions Fully or
year.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-Partly Taxable.
tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu- Effect on you or your beneficiary. If yourtions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of FormAt the time this publication went to account stops being an IRA because you or your1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tellsprint, Congress was considering legis- beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction,you what type of distribution you received fromlation that would extend qualified chari- the account is treated as distributing all its as-
CAUTION
!your IRA.table distributions from IRAs. To find out if this sets to you at their fair market values on the first
legislation was enacted, and for more details, go Withholding. Federal income tax is withheld day of the year. If the total of those values is
to www.irs.gov/formspubs. from distributions from traditional IRAs unless more than your basis in the IRA, you will have a
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 127

Page 130 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxable gain that is includible in your income. For contribution that you withdraw from your tradi- additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Form
tional IRA before your tax return is due if both 5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, toinformation on figuring your gain and reporting it
the following conditions are met. figure and report the tax.in income, see Are Distributions Taxable , ear-
lier. The distribution may be subject to additional • No deduction was allowed for the excess Early distributions defined. Early distribu-taxes or penalties. contribution. tions generally are amounts distributed from
your traditional IRA account or annuity before• You withdraw the interest or other incomeTaxes on prohibited transactions. If some-
you are age 591/2.earned on the excess contribution.one other than the owner or beneficiary of a
traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac- You can take into account any loss on the contri- Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under agetion, that person may be liable for certain taxes. bution while it was in the IRA when calculating 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on theIn general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was distribution of any assets (money or other prop-the prohibited transaction and a 100% additional a loss, the net income you must withdraw may erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributionstax if the transaction is not corrected. be a negative amount. before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-
tions.How to treat withdrawn interest or otherMore information. For more information on The 10% additional tax applies to the part ofincome. You must include in your gross in-prohibited transactions, see Publication 590. the distribution that you have to include in grosscome the interest or other income that was income. It is in addition to any regular income taxearned on the excess contribution. Report it on on that amount.your return for the year in which the excessInvestment in Collectibles
contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter- Exceptions. There are several exceptions
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the est or other income may be subject to an addi- to the age 59 1/2 rule. Even if you receive a
amount invested is considered distributed to you tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussed distribution before you are age 59 1/2, you may
in the year invested. You may have to pay the later. not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are
10% additional tax on early distributions, dis- in one of the following situations.
Excess contributions withdrawn after duecussed later. • You have unreimbursed medical expensesdate of return. In general, you must include all that are more than 7.5% of your adjustedCollectibles. These include: distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional gross income.IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow-• Artworks, ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess • The distributions are not more than the
• Rugs, contributions from your IRA and not include the cost of your medical insurance.
amount withdrawn in your gross income.• Antiques, • You are disabled.
• Total contributions (other than rollover• Metals, • You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRAcontributions) for 2010 to your IRA were owner.• Gems, not more than $5,000 ($6,000 if you are
50 or older). • You are receiving distributions in the form• Stamps, of an annuity.• You did not take a deduction for the ex-• Coins, cess contribution being withdrawn. • The distributions are not more than your
• Alcoholic beverages, and qualified higher education expenses.The withdrawal can take place at any time, even
• Certain other tangible personal property. after the due date, including extensions, for filing • You use the distributions to buy, build, or
your tax return for the year. rebuild a first home.
Exception. Your IRA can invest in one, • The distribution is due to an IRS levy ofone-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S. Excess contribution deducted in an earlier the qualified plan.gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted by year. If you deducted an excess contribution in
the Treasury Department. It can also invest in an earlier year for which the total contributions • The distribution is a qualified reservist dis-
certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver, were not more than the maximum deductible tribution.
palladium, and platinum bullion. amount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlier Most of these exceptions are explained in Publi-years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 if cation 590.you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for 2005
Excess Contributions ($4,500 if you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for
2006 or 2007 ($5,000 if you were age 50 or Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-Generally, an excess contribution is the amount older), $5,000 for 2008 or 2009 ($6,000 if you erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are notcontributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year were age 50 or older)), you can still remove the subject to either regular income tax or the 10%that is more than the smaller of: excess from your traditional IRA and not include additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess
it in your gross income. To do this, file Form contributions after the due date of your return• The maximum deductible amount for the
1040X for that year and do not deduct the ex- are also tax free and therefore not subject to theyear. For 2010, this is $5,000 ($6,000 if
cess contribution on the amended return. Gen- 10% additional tax. (See Excess contributionsyou are 50 or older), or
erally, you can file an amended return within 3 withdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) This• Your taxable compensation for the year. years after you filed your return, or 2 years from also applies to transfers incident to divorce, as
the time the tax was paid, whichever is later. discussed earlier.
Tax on excess contributions. In general, if Receivership distributions. Early distribu-Excess due to incorrect rollover information.the excess contributions for a year are not with- tions (with or without your consent) from savingsIf an excess contribution in your traditional IRA isdrawn by the date your return for the year is due institutions placed in receivership are subject tothe result of a rollover and the excess occurred(including extensions), you are subject to a 6% this tax unless one of the exceptions listed ear-because the information the plan was requiredtax. You must pay the 6% tax each year on lier applies. This is true even if the distribution isto give you was incorrect, you can withdraw theexcess amounts that remain in your traditional from a receiver that is a state agency.excess contribution. The limits mentioned aboveIRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannot are increased by the amount of the excess thatbe more than 6% of the combined value of all Additional 10% tax. The additional tax onis due to the incorrect information. You will haveyour IRAs as of the end of your tax year. early distributions is 10% of the amount of theto amend your return for the year in which the early distribution that you must include in yourexcess occurred to correct the reporting of theExcess contributions withdrawn by due date gross income. This tax is in addition to anyrollover amounts in that year. Do not include inof return. You will not have to pay the 6% tax if regular income tax resulting from including theyour gross income the part of the excess contri-you withdraw an excess contribution made dur- distribution in income.bution caused by the incorrect information.ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest or
Nondeductible contributions. The tax onother income earned on the excess contribution.
early distributions does not apply to the part of aYou must complete your withdrawal by the date
Early Distributions distribution that represents a return of your non-your tax return for that year is due, including
deductible contributions (basis).extensions. You must include early distributions of taxable
How to treat withdrawn contributions. Do amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross More information. For more information on
not include in your gross income an excess income. Early distributions are also subject to an early distributions, see Publication 590.
Page 128 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 131 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the requirements, qualified distributions (dis-Excess Accumulations
cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be(Insufficient Distributions) Roth IRAs made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA asYou cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRA Regardless of your age, you may be able to long as you live.indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving establish and make nondeductible contributions
distributions by April 1 of the year following the to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.
year in which you reach age 701/2. The required When Can a Roth IRA BeContributions not reported. You do not re-minimum distribution for any year after the year
port Roth IRA contributions on your return. Opened?in which you reach age 70 1/2 must be made by
December 31 of that later year.
You can open a Roth IRA at any time. However,What Is a Roth IRA?Tax on excess. If distributions are less than the time for making contributions for any year isthe required minimum distribution for the year, limited. See When Can You Make Contributions,A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that later under Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA?except as explained in this chapter, is subject toyear on the amount not distributed as required. the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined
Request to waive the tax. If the excess ac- earlier). It can be either an account or an annu- Can You Contribute to a
cumulation is due to reasonable error, and you ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities Roth IRA?have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the are described in Publication 590.
insufficient distribution, you can request that the To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA iftax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is you have taxable compensation (defined later)relief, attach a statement of explanation and opened. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but and your modified AGI (defined later) is lesscomplete Form 5329 as instructed under Waiver neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be than:of tax in the Instructions for Form 5329. designated as a Roth IRA.
• $177,000 for married filing jointly or quali-Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deductExemption from tax. If you are unable to take contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy fying widow(er),required distributions because you have a tradi-
tional IRA invested in a contract issued by an
insurance company that is in state insurer delin- Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjusted Grossquency proceedings, the 50% excise tax does Income for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Your Records
not apply if the conditions and requirements of
Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.
More information. For more information on Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.excess accumulations, see Publication 590.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38, or
Form 1040A, line 22 ........................... . 1.Reporting Additional Taxes
2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report the
(other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA and a rollover from atax on excess contributions, early distributions,
qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA ............... . 2.and excess accumulations. If you must file Form
5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Form 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........................ . 3.1040EZ.
4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32, orFiling a tax return. If you must file an individ- Form 1040A, line 17 ........................... . 4.ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and
attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the total addi- 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line
tional taxes due on Form 1040, line 58. 33, or Form 1040A, line 18 ....................... . 5.
Not filing a tax return. If you do not have to 6. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Formfile a tax return but do have to pay one of the 1040, line 35 ................................ . 6.additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-
pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and 7. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion
place you would have filed your Form 1040. Be from Form 2555, line 45, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 ....... . 7.
sure to include your address on page 1 and your 8. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 8.signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but do
not attach, a check or money order payable to  9. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815,the United States Treasury for the tax you owe, line 14 .................................... . 9.as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se-
10. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits fromcurity number and ª2010 Form 5329º on your
Form 8839, line 26 ............................ . 10.check or money order.
Form 5329 not required. You do not have to 11. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 10 ............... . 11.
use Form 5329 if either of the following situa- 12 Enter:tions exist. • $177,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)
• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is • $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your 
correctly shown in box 7 of Form 1099-R. spouse at any time during the yearIf you do not owe any other additional tax • $120,000 for all others 12.on a distribution, multiply the taxable part
Is the amount on line 11 more than the amount on line 12?of the early distribution by 10% and enter
If yes, then see the Note below.the result on Form 1040, line 58. Put ªNoº
If no, then the amount on line 11 is your modified AGI for Roth IRAto the left of the line to indicate that you do
not have to file Form 5329. However, if purposes.
you owe this tax and also owe any other Note. If the amount on line 11 is more than the amount on line 12 and you have otheradditional tax on a distribution, do not income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that areenter this 10% additional tax directly on subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose ofyour Form 1040. You must file Form 5329 figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. (If you receive social security benefits,to report your additional taxes. use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then go to list
• If you rolled over part or all of a distribution item (2) under Modified AGI or line 3 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure your modified
from a qualified retirement plan, the part AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based phaseouts, yourrolled over is not subject to the tax on modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 11.early distributions. 
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 129

Page 132 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• $120,000 for single, head of household, or Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
married filing separately and you did not
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of yourlive with your spouse at any time during
modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).the year, or
• $10,000 for married filing separately and
IF you have taxableyou lived with your spouse at any time
compensation and your AND your modified during the year.
filing status is... AGI is... THEN...
You may be eligible to claim a credit for less than $167,000 you can contribute up to $5,000married filing jointly, or 
contributions to your Roth IRA. For ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)
more information, see chapter 37. 2010).
TIP
at least $167,000 the amount you can contribute is
but less than $177,000 reduced as explained underIs there an age limit for contributions? Con-
Contribution limit reduced intributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-
Publication 590.less of your age.
$177,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your
spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $5,000married filing separately
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with your
the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much 2010).spouse at any time during
Can Be Contributed  under Traditional IRAs ), the year more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isyou file jointly, and your modified AGI is less
but less than $10,000 reduced as explained underthan $176,000.
Contribution limit reduced in
Publication 590.Compensation. Compensation includes
wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo- $10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.nuses, and other amounts received for providing
less than $105,000 you can contribute up to $5,000single,personal services. It also includes commissions,
self-employment income, nontaxable combat ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, or
pay, military differential pay, and taxable ali- 2010).married filing separately
mony and separate maintenance payments. and you did not live with at least $105,000 the amount you can contribute isyour spouse at any time but less than $120,000 reduced as explained underduring the yearModified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA Contribution limit reduced inpurposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI) Publication 590.as shown on your return modified as follows.
$120,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.1. Subtract the following.
a. Roth IRA conversions included on Form
1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made Contribution limit reduced. If your modified
11b. only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener- AGI is above a certain amount, your contribution
ally is the lesser of the following amounts. limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 tob. Roth IRA rollovers from qualified retire- determine if this reduction applies to you.ment plans included on Form 1040, line • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in
16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. 2010). Figuring the reduction. If the amount you
can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see• Your taxable compensation.2. Add the following deductions and exclu- Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction.
sions: However, if your modified AGI is above a certain
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,a. Traditional IRA deduction, as explained later under Contribution limit re- When Can You Make
duced.b. Student loan interest deduction, Contributions?
c. Domestic production activities deduc- Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu- You can make contributions to a Roth IRA for ation, tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional year at any time during the year or by the due
IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- date of your return for that year (not includingd. Foreign earned income exclusion,
tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as extensions).e. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction, your limit would be if contributions were made You can make contributions for 2010only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri-f. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in- by the due date (not including exten-butions for the year to all IRAs other than Rothterest shown on Form 8815, and sions) for filing your 2010 tax return.
TIPIRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP org. Exclusion of employer-provided adop- SIMPLE IRA plan do not affect this limit.tion benefits shown on Form 8839.
This means that your contribution limit is What if You Contribute Too Much?You can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure your generally the lesser of the following amounts.
modified AGI. A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu-• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in
tion to a Roth IRA.At the time this publication went to 2010) minus all contributions (other than
print, Congress was considering legis- employer contributions under a SEP or
lation that would extend the deduction SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs
CAUTION
! Excess contributions. These are the contri-for tuition and fees. To find out if this legislation other than Roth IRAs. butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equalwas enacted, and for more details, go to www. the total of:• Your taxable compensation minus all con-irs.gov/formspubs. tributions (other than employer contribu- 1. Amounts contributed for the tax year totions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop-for the year to all IRAs other than Roth erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRAHow Much Can Be Contributed? IRAs. or properly converted from a traditional
The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally However, if your modified AGI is above a certain IRA or rolled over from a qualified retire-
depends on whether contributions are made amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, ment plan, as described later) that are
only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and as explained next under Contribution limit re- more than your contribution limit for the
Roth IRAs. duced. year, plus
Page 130 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 133 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Any excess contributions for the preceding can elect to include the entire amount in income Rollover From a Roth IRA
year, reduced by the total of: in 2010. You may be required to include some,
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theor all, of a 2010 conversion from a traditional,
a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAs assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute themSEP, or SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA in income in
for the year, plus within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the2010 if you also take a Roth IRA distribution in
rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo-2010. You report a conversion from a traditional,b. Your contribution limit for the year mi- ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-SEP, or SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA on Formnus your contributions to all your IRAs tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers.8606.for the year.
Rollover from designated Roth account. ARollover from a qualified retirement plan into rollover from a designated Roth account canWithdrawal of excess contributions. For a Roth IRA. You can roll over into a Roth IRA only be made to another designated Roth ac-purposes of determining excess contributions, all or part of an eligible rollover distribution you count or to a Roth IRA.any contribution that is withdrawn on or before receive from your (or your deceased spouse's):the due date (including extensions) for filing your
• Employer's qualified pension,tax return for the year is treated as an amount Are Distributions Taxable?profit-sharing or stock bonus plan,not contributed. This treatment applies only if
any earnings on the contributions are also with- You do not include in your gross income quali-• Annuity plan,drawn. The earnings are considered to have fied distributions or distributions that are a return• Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)been earned and received in the year the excess of your regular contributions from your Rothplan), orcontribution was made. IRA(s). You also do not include distributions
from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into• Governmental deferred compensationApplying excess contributions. If contribu- another Roth IRA. You may have to include partplan (section 457 plan).tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than of other distributions in your income. See Order-the limit, you can apply the excess contribution Any amount rolled over is subject to the same ing rules for distributions, later.in one year to a later year if the contributions for rules for converting a traditional IRA into a Roth
that later year are less than the maximum al- What are qualified distributions? A qualifiedIRA. Also, the rollover contribution must meet
lowed for that year. distribution is any payment or distribution fromthe rollover requirements that apply to the spe-
your Roth IRA that meets the following require-cific type of retirement plan.
ments.Can You Move Amounts Income. You must include in your gross in-
come distributions from a qualified retirement 1. It is made after the 5-year period beginningInto a Roth IRA? plan that you would have had to include in in- with the first taxable year for which a con-
come if you had not rolled them over into a Roth tribution was made to a Roth IRA set upYou may be able to convert amounts from either IRA. You do not include in gross income any part for your benefit, anda traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth of a distribution from a qualified retirement planIRA. You may be able to roll amounts over from 2. The payment or distribution is:that is a return of contributions (after-tax contri-a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. You butions) to the plan that were taxable to youmay be able to recharacterize contributions a. Made on or after the date you reachwhen paid.made to one IRA as having been made directly age 591/2,These amounts are normally included in in-to a different IRA. You can roll amounts over b. Made because you are disabled,come on your return for the year you rolled themfrom a designated Roth account or from one
over from the employer plan to a Roth IRA. ForRoth IRA to another Roth IRA. c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estate
2010 rollovers special rules apply. See Special after your death, or
rules for 2010 rollovers from employer plans to
d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) ofRoth IRAs, next.Conversions certain qualified first-time homebuyer
Special rules for 2010 rollovers from quali- amounts. See Publication 590 for moreYou can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. fied retirement plans to Roth IRAs. For any information.The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard- rollovers from qualified retirement plans to aless of the conversion method used. Most of the Roth IRA in 2010, any amounts that are requiredrules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo- Additional tax on distributions of conversionto be included in income are generally includedver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi- and certain rollover contributions withinin income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. Iftional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However, 5-year period. If, within the 5-year periodyou elect otherwise, you can choose to includethe 1-year waiting period does not apply. starting with the first day of your tax year inthe entire amount in income in 2010. You may
which you convert an amount from a traditionalbe required to include some, or all, of a 2010Conversion methods. You can convert IRA or rollover an amount from a qualified retire-rollover from a qualified employer plan to a Rothamounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in ment plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distributionIRA in income in 2010 if you also take a Rothany of the following ways. from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 10%IRA distribution in 2010. For 2010, you report a
• Rollover. You can receive a distribution additional tax on early distributions. You gener-rollover from a qualified retirement plan to a
from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con- ally must pay the 10% additional tax on anyRoth IRA on Form 8606.
tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days amount attributable to the part of the amountIf you must include any amount in yourafter the distribution. converted or rolled over (the conversion or rollo-gross income, you may have to in- ver contribution) that you had to include in in-• Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di- crease your withholding or make esti-
CAUTION
! come. A separate 5-year period applies to eachrect the trustee of the traditional IRA to mated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax conversion and rollover. See Ordering rules fortransfer an amount from the traditional IRA Withholding and Estimated Tax. distributions, later, to determine the amount, ifto the trustee of the Roth IRA. For more information, see Rollover From any, of the distribution that is attributable to the
Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA in chapter 2 of• Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of part of the conversion or rollover contribution
Publication 590.the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth that you had to include in income.
IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer
Additional tax on other early distributions.an amount from the traditional IRA to the Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally, Unless an exception applies, you must pay theRoth IRA. you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA 10% additional tax on the taxable part of anyto a Roth IRA under the same rules explained distributions that are not qualified distributions.Same trustee. Conversions made with the earlier under Converting From Any Traditional See Publication 590 for more information.same trustee can be made by redesignating the IRA to a Roth IRA.
traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-  However, you cannot convert any amount Ordering rules for distributions. If you re-ing a new account or issuing a new contract. distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is
2-year period beginning on the date you firstSpecial rules for 2010 conversions. For not a qualified distribution, part of it may be
participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintainedany conversions from a traditional, SEP, or taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-
by your employer.SIMPLE IRA to a Roth IRA in 2010, any tions (including conversion contributions and
amounts required to be included in income are rollover contributions from qualified retirement
generally included in income in equal amounts More information. For more detailed informa- plans) and earnings are considered to be distrib-
in 2011 and 2012. If you elect otherwise, you tion on conversions, see Publication 590. uted from your Roth IRA. Regular contributions
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 131

Page 134 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are distributed first. See Publication 590 for • A decree of divorce or separate mainte- one-half of these payments as alimony. Your
more information. nance or a written instrument incident to spouse must report one-half of these payments
that decree, as alimony received. If you and your spouse
Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets? itemize deductions, you can each claim one-half• A written separation agreement, orYou are not required to take distributions from of the real estate taxes and none of the home
your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri- • A decree or any type of court order requir- insurance. 
bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do not ing a spouse to make payments for the  If your home is held as tenants by the en-apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. support or maintenance of the other tirety or joint tenants, none of your payments forHowever, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, spouse. This includes a temporary decree, taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item-certain of the minimum distribution rules that an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a ize deductions, you can claim all of the realapply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs. decree of alimony pendente lite (while estate taxes and none of the home insurance.awaiting action on the final decree or
Other payments to a third party. If youMore information. For more detailed informa- agreement).
made other third-party payments, see Publica-tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.
tion 504 to see whether any part of the payments
qualifies as alimony.Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Instruments❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals18. Executed After 1984
The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
Alimony ments under divorce or separation instrumentsGeneral Rules
executed after 1984.
The following rules apply to alimony regardless
of when the divorce or separation instrument Exception for instruments executed beforeIntroduction was executed. 1985. There are two situations where the rules
This chapter discusses the rules that apply if you for instruments executed after 1984 apply toPayments not alimony. Not all paymentspay or receive alimony. It covers the following instruments executed before 1985.under a divorce or separation instrument aretopics. alimony. Alimony does not include: 1. A divorce or separation instrument exe-• What payments are alimony. cuted before 1985 and then modified after• Child support, 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules• What payments are not alimony, such as • Noncash property settlements, will apply.child support.
• Payments that are your spouse's part of 2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-• How to deduct alimony you paid. community income as explained under ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-• How to report alimony you received as in- Community Property in Publication 504, rated into, or adopted by, a final decreecome. executed after 1984 that:• Payments to keep up the payer's property,
• Whether you must recapture the tax bene- or a. Changes the amount or period of pay-fits of alimony. Recapture means adding • Use of the payer's property. ment, orback in your income all or part of a deduc-
tion you took in a prior year. b. Adds or deletes any contingency or
condition.Payments to a third party. Cash payments,
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or checks, or money orders to a third party on
former spouse under a divorce or separation For the rules for alimony payments underbehalf of your spouse under the terms of your
instrument. It does not include voluntary pay- pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-divorce or separation instrument can be ali-
ments that are not made under a divorce or tions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504mony, if they otherwise qualify. These include
separation instrument. on the IRS website at www.irs.gov.payments for your spouse's medical expenses,
Alimony is deductible by the payer and must housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,
Example 1. In November 1984, you andbe included in the spouse's or former spouse's etc. The payments are treated as received by
your former spouse executed a written separa-income. Although this chapter is generally writ- your spouse and then paid to the third party.
tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree often for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can Life insurance premiums. Alimony includes divorce was substituted for the written separa-use the information to determine whether an premiums you must pay under your divorce or tion agreement. The decree of divorce did notamount received is alimony. separation instrument for insurance on your life change the terms for the alimony you pay yourTo be alimony, a payment must meet certain to the extent your spouse owns the policy. former spouse. The decree of divorce is treatedrequirements. Different requirements generally
as executed before 1985. Alimony paymentsapply to payments under instruments executed Payments for jointly-owned home. If your
under this decree are not subject to the rules forafter 1984 and to payments under instruments divorce or separation instrument states that you
payments under instruments executed afterexecuted before 1985. This chapter discusses must pay expenses for a home owned by you
1984.the rules for payments under instruments exe- and your spouse or former spouse, some of your
cuted after 1984. If you need the rules for pay- payments may be alimony.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as inments under pre-1985 instruments, get and Mortgage payments. If you must pay all the Example 1  except that the decree of divorcekeep a copy of the 2004 version of Publication mortgage payments (principal and interest) on a changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex-504. That was the last year the information on jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify ample, the decree of divorce is not treated aspre-1985 instruments was included in Publica- as alimony, you can deduct one-half of the total executed before 1985. The alimony paymentstion 504. payments as alimony. If you itemize deductions are subject to the rules for payments under in-Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to and the home is a qualified home, you can claim struments executed after 1984.determine whether certain payments are con- half of the interest in figuring your deductiblesidered alimony. interest. Your spouse must report one-half of the Alimony requirements. A payment to or for apayments as alimony received. If your spouse spouse under a divorce or separation instrumentDefinitions. The following definitions apply itemizes deductions and the home is a qualified is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint returnthroughout this chapter. home, he or she can claim one-half of the inter- with each other and all the following require-Spouse or former spouse. Unless other- est on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter- ments are met.wise stated, the term ªspouseº includes former est.
• The payment is in cash.spouse. Taxes and insurance. If you must pay all
• The instrument does not designate theDivorce or separation instrument. The the real estate taxes or insurance on a home
payment as not alimony.term ªdivorce or separation instrumentº means: held as tenants in common, you can deduct
Page 132 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 135 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cease upon the death of your spouse if, forTable 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
example, the liability for continued payments
would end under state law.Payments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the
following are true: following are true: Example. You must pay your former
Payments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years.
separation instrument. separation instrument. Your divorce decree states that the payments
will end upon your former spouse's death. YouPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return must also pay your former spouse or your formerreturn with each other. with each other. spouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for
10 years. The death of your spouse would notPayment is in cash (including checks or Payment is:
terminate these payments under state law.money orders). • Not in cash, The $10,000 annual payments may qualify• A noncash property settlement, as alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that• Spouse's part of community income, or do not end upon your former spouse's death are
• To keep up the payer's property. not alimony.
Payment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument as Substitute payments. If you must make
as not alimony. not alimony. any payments in cash or property after your
spouse's death as a substitute for continuingSpouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of otherwise qualifying payments before the death,divorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are the otherwise qualifying payments are not ali-members of the same household. members of the same household. mony. To the extent that your payments begin,
accelerate, or increase because of the death ofPayments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of the
your spouse, otherwise qualifying payments yourecipient spouse. recipient spouse.
made may be treated as payments that were not
Payment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support. alimony. Whether or not such payments will be
treated as not alimony depends on all the facts
and circumstances.These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the
and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the recipient.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you
must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.
The payments will stop at the end of 6 years or• The spouses are not members of the qualifying payments are not alimony. You do this upon your former spouse's death, if earlier.same household at the time the payments by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-
Your former spouse has custody of your mi-are made. This requirement applies only if ration instrument that states the payments are
nor children. The decree provides that if anythe spouses are legally separated under a not deductible as alimony by you and are ex-
child is still a minor at your spouse's death, youdecree of divorce or separate mainte- cludable from your spouse's income. For this
must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until thenance. purpose, any instrument (written statement)
youngest child reaches the age of majority. Thesigned by both of you that makes this designa-• There is no liability to make any payment trust income and corpus (principal) are to betion and that refers to a previous written separa-(in cash or property) after the death of the used for your children's benefit.tion agreement is treated as a written separationrecipient spouse. These facts indicate that the payments to beagreement (and therefore a divorce or separa-
made after your former spouse's death are a• The payment is not treated as child sup- tion instrument). If you are subject to temporary
substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annualport. support orders, the designation must be made in
payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay-the original or a later temporary support order.Each of these requirements is discussed next. ments, $10,000 is not alimony.Your spouse can exclude the payments from
income only if he or she attaches a copy of theCash payment requirement. Only cash pay- Example 2. Under your divorce decree, youinstrument designating them as not alimony toments, including checks and money orders, must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.his or her return. The copy must be attachedqualify as alimony. The following do not qualify The payments will stop at the end of 15 years oreach year the designation applies.as alimony. upon your former spouse's death, if earlier. TheSpouses cannot be members of the same decree provides that if your former spouse dies• Transfers of services or property (includ- household.  Payments to your spouse while before the end of the 15-year period, you musting a debt instrument of a third party or an you are members of the same household are not pay the estate the difference between $450,000annuity contract). alimony if you are legally separated under a ($30,000 ×  15) and the total amount paid up to• Execution of a debt instrument by the decree of divorce or separate maintenance. A that time. For example, if your spouse dies at thepayer. home you formerly shared is considered one end of the tenth year, you must pay the estatehousehold, even if you physically separate your- $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).• The use of the payer's property. selves in the home. These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-You are not treated as members of the samePayments to a third party. Cash payments ment to be made after your former spouse'shousehold if one of you is preparing to leave theto a third party under the terms of your divorce or death is a substitute for the full amount of thehousehold and does leave no later than 1 monthseparation instrument can qualify as cash pay- $30,000 annual payments. None of the annualafter the date of the payment.ments to your spouse. See Payments to a third payments are alimony. The result would be the
party under General Rules, earlier. Exception. If you are not legally separated same if the payment required at death were to
under a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Also, cash payments made to a third party at be discounted by an appropriate interest factor
nance, a payment under a written separationthe written request of your spouse may qualify to account for the prepayment.
agreement, support decree, or other court orderas alimony if all the following requirements are
may qualify as alimony even if you are members Child support. A payment that is specificallymet.
of the same household when the payment is designated as child support or treated as specifi-• The payments are in lieu of payments of made. cally designated as child support under youralimony directly to your spouse. divorce or separation instrument is not alimony.
Liability for payments after death of recipient• The written request states that both The amount of child support may vary over time.
spouse. If any part of payments you makespouses intend the payments to be treated Child support payments are not deductible by
must continue to be made for any period afteras alimony. the payer and are not taxable to the recipient.
your spouse's death, that part of your payments• You receive the written request from your Specifically designated as child support.is not alimony, whether made before or after thespouse before you file your return for the A payment will be treated as specifically desig-death. If all of the payments would continue,year you made the payments. nated as child support to the extent that thethen none of the payments made before or after payment is reduced either:the death are alimony.
Payments designated as not alimony. You The divorce or separation instrument does • On the happening of a contingency relat-
and your spouse can designate that otherwise not have to expressly state that the payments ing to your child, or
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 133

Page 136 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• At a time that can be clearly associated If you do not provide your spouse's Figuring the recapture. You can use Work-
social security number, you may have sheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recapturedwith the contingency.
to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc- alimony.
CAUTION
!A payment may be treated as specifically desig- tion may be disallowed.nated as child support even if other separate Including the recapture in income. If you
payments are specifically designated as child must include a recapture amount in income,
show it on Form 1040, line 11 (ªAlimony re-support.
ceivedº). Cross out ªreceivedº and enter ªrecap-Contingency relating to your child. A ture.º On the dotted line next to the amount,How To Reportcontingency relates to your child if it depends on enter your spouse's last name and social secur-any event relating to that child. It does not matter ity number.Alimony Receivedwhether the event is certain or likely to occur.
Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct aEvents relating to your child include the child's: Report alimony you received as income on Form recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line• Becoming employed, 1040, line 11. You cannot use Form 1040A or 31a (ªAlimony paidº). Cross out ªpaidº and enterForm 1040EZ.• Dying, ªrecapture.º In the space provided, enter your
spouse's social security number.You must give the person who paid the• Leaving the household, alimony your social security number. If
• Leaving school, you do not, you may have to pay a $50
CAUTION
!
penalty.• Marrying, or
• Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency. 19.
Payments that would otherwise qualify as ali- Recapture Rule
mony are presumed to be reduced at a time
If your alimony payments decrease or terminateclearly associated with the happening of a con- Education-during the first 3 calendar years, you may betingency relating to your child only in the follow-
subject to the recapture rule. If you are subject toing situations.
this rule, you have to include in income in the Related • The payments are to be reduced not more third year part of the alimony payments youthan 6 months before or after the date the previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct inchild will reach 18, 21, or local age of Adjustmentsthe third year part of the alimony payments he ormajority. she previously included in income.
• The payments are to be reduced on two or The 3-year period starts with the first calen-more occasions that occur not more than Introductiondar year you make a payment qualifying as1 year before or after a different one of alimony under a decree of divorce or separate This chapter discusses the education-relatedyour children reaches a certain age from adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-maintenance or a written separation agreement.18 to 24. This certain age must be the justed gross income.Do not include any time in which payments weresame for each child, but need not be a This chapter covers the student loan interestbeing made under temporary support orders.whole number of years. deduction.The second and third years are the next 2 calen-
In all other situations, reductions in payments dar years, whether or not payments are made At the time this publication went toare not treated as clearly associated with the during those years. print, Congress was considering legis-
happening of a contingency relating to your lation that would extend the deductionsThe reasons for a reduction or termination of
CAUTION
!child. for educator expenses and tuition and fees thatalimony payments that can require a recapture expired at the end of 2009. To find out if thisEither you or the IRS can overcome the pre- include: legislation was enacted, and for more details, gosumption in the two situations just described. • A change in your divorce or separation to www.irs.gov/formspubs. Also see PublicationThis is done by showing that the time at which instrument, 970, Tax Benefits for Education.the payments are to be reduced was determined
• A failure to make timely payments,independently of any contingencies relating to
Useful Itemsyour children. For example, if you can show that • A reduction in your ability to provide sup- You may want to see:the period of alimony payments is customary in port, orthe local jurisdiction, such as a period equal to
• A reduction in your spouse's support Publicationone-half of the duration of the marriage, you can
needs.overcome the presumption and may be able to ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
treat the amount as alimony.
When to apply the recapture rule. You are
subject to the recapture rule in the third year if
the alimony you pay in the third year decreases Student Loan Interestby more than $15,000 from the second year orHow To Deduct
the alimony you pay in the second and third Deductionyears decreases significantly from the alimonyAlimony Paid
you pay in the first year. Generally, personal interest you pay, other thanYou can deduct alimony you paid, whether or When you figure a decrease in alimony, do certain mortgage interest, is not deductible on
not you itemize deductions on your return. You your tax return. However, if your modified ad-not include the following amounts.
must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form justed gross income (MAGI) is less than• Payments made under a temporary sup-1040A or Form 1040EZ. $75,000 ($150,000 if filing a joint return) there isport order. a special deduction allowed for paying interestEnter the amount of alimony you paid on
on a student loan (also known as an education• Payments required over a period of atForm 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on loan) used for higher education. For most tax-least 3 calendar years that vary becauseline 31b, enter your spouse's social security payers, MAGI is the adjusted gross income asthey are a fixed part of your income from anumber. figured on their federal income tax return beforebusiness or property, or from compensa- If you paid alimony to more than one person, subtracting any deduction for student loan inter-tion for employment or self-employment.enter the social security number of one of the est. This deduction can reduce the amount of
• Payments that decrease because of therecipients. Show the social security number and your income subject to tax by up to $2,500 in
death of either spouse or the remarriageamount paid to each other recipient on an at- 2010. Table 19-1 summarizes the features of
of the spouse receiving the paymentstached statement. Enter your total payments on the student loan interest deduction.
before the end of the third year.line 31a.
Page 134 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 137 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Even if not paid with the proceeds of that • The allowance for room and board, as de-Table 19-1. Student Loan Interest
type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid or termined by the eligible educational institu-Deduction at a Glance
incurred within a reasonable period of time if tion, that was included in the cost ofDo not rely on this table alone. both of the following requirements are met. attendance (for federal financial aid pur-Refer to the text for more details. poses) for a particular academic period• The expenses relate to a specific aca- and living arrangement of the student, orFeature Description demic period.
• The actual amount charged if the studentMaximum You can reduce your income • The loan proceeds are disbursed within a is residing in housing owned or operatedbenefit subject to tax by up to $2,500. period that begins 90 days before the start by the eligible educational institution.of that academic period and ends 90 daysYour student loan:Loan
qualifications after the end of that academic period.• must have been taken out
solely to pay qualified Eligible educational institution. An eligible
education expenses, and If neither of the above situations applies, the educational institution is any college, university,
• cannot be from a related reasonable period of time usually is determined vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
person or made under a based on all the relevant facts and circum- cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-qualified employer plan. stances. dent aid program administered by the
Department of Education. It includes virtually allThe student must be:Student Academic period. An academic period in- accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-qualifications • you, your spouse, or your cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherdependent, and vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-
period of study (such as a summer school ses-• enrolled at least half-time in stitutions. 
sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-a degree program. Certain educational institutions located
tional institution. In the case of an educational outside the United States also participate in theTime limit on You can deduct interest paid institution that uses credit hours or clock hours U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu-deduction during the remaining period of and does not have academic terms, each pay- dent Aid (FSA) programs.your student loan. ment period can be treated as an academic For purposes of the student loan interest
Phaseout The amount of your deduction period. deduction, an eligible educational institutiondepends on your income level. also includes an institution conducting an intern-Eligible student. This is a student who was ship or residency program leading to a degree or enrolled at least half-time in a program leading certificate from an institution of higher educa-to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu- tion, a hospital, or a health care facility thatStudent Loan Interest cational credential. offers postgraduate training.
Defined An educational institution must meet theEnrolled at least half-time. A student was
above criteria only during the academic pe-enrolled at least half-time if the student was
Student loan interest is interest you paid during riod(s) for which the student loan was incurred.taking at least half the normal full-time work load
the year on a qualified student loan. It includes The deductibility of interest on the loan is notfor his or her course of study.
both required and voluntary interest payments. affected by the institution's subsequent loss ofThe standard for what is half of the normal
eligibility.full-time work load is determined by each eligible
educational institution. However, the standard The educational institution should beQualified Student Loan may not be lower than any of those established able to tell you if it is an eligible educa-by the Department of Education under the tional institution.This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualified
TIP Higher Education Act of 1965.education expenses (defined later) that were:
Adjustments to qualified education ex-Related person. You cannot deduct interest• For you, your spouse, or a person who penses. You must reduce your qualified edu-on a loan you get from a related person. Relatedwas your dependent (defined in chapter 3) cation expenses by certain tax-free items (suchpersons include:when you took out the loan, as the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-• Your spouse,• Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe- ships). See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for
riod of time before or after you took out the details.• Your brothers and sisters,
loan, and • Your half brothers and half sisters,
• For education provided during an aca- • Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, Include as Interestdemic period for an eligible student. etc.),
In addition to simple interest on the loan, certainLoans from the following sources are not qual- • Your lineal descendants (children, grand- loan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter-ified student loans. children, etc.), and est on revolving lines of credit, and interest on
refinanced student loans can be student loan• A related person. • Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts,
interest if all other requirements are met.and exempt organizations.• A qualified employer plan.
Loan origination fee. In general, this is a
one-time fee charged by the lender when a loanExceptions. For purposes of the student Qualified employer plan. You cannot deduct
is made. To be deductible as interest, the feeloan interest deduction, the following are excep- interest on a loan made under a qualified em-
must be for the use of money rather than fortions to the general rules for dependents. ployer plan or under a contract purchased under
property or services (such as commitment feessuch a plan.• An individual can be your dependent even or processing costs) provided by the lender. Aif you are the dependent of another tax- loan origination fee treated as interest accruespayer. over the life of the loan.Qualified Education Expenses• An individual can be your dependent even Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interestif the individual files a joint return with a For purposes of the student loan interest deduc- on a student loan that is added by the lender tospouse. tion, these expenses are the total costs of at- the outstanding principal balance of the loan.tending an eligible educational institution,• An individual can be your dependent even Interest on revolving lines of credit. Thisincluding graduate school. They includeif the individual had gross income for the interest, which includes interest on credit cardamounts paid for the following items.year that was equal to or more than the debt, is student loan interest if the borrower usesexemption amount for the year ($3,650 for • Tuition and fees. the line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali-2010). fied education expenses. See Qualified Educa-• Room and board.
tion Expenses, earlier.• Books, supplies, and equipment.Reasonable period of time. Qualified educa- Interest on refinanced student loans. Thistion expenses are treated as paid or incurred • Other necessary expenses (such as trans- includes interest on both:within a reasonable period of time before or after portation).
you take out the loan if they are paid with the • Consolidated loansÐloans used to refi-
proceeds of student loans that are part of a The cost of room and board qualifies only to nance more than one student loan of the
federal postsecondary education loan program. the extent that it is not more than the greater of: same borrower, and
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 135

Page 138 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Collapsed loansÐtwo or more loans of • Your filing status is any filing status except take a student loan interest deduction if your
the same borrower that are treated by married filing separately. MAGI is $75,000 or more ($150,000 or more if
both the lender and the borrower as one you file a joint return). For details on figuring• No one else is claiming an exemption forloan. your MAGI, see chapter 4 of Publication 970.you on his or her tax return.
• You are legally obligated to pay interest on How Do You Figure theIf you refinance a qualified student loan a qualified student loan.for more than your original loan and Deduction• You paid interest on a qualified studentyou use the additional amount for any
CAUTION
!
loan.purpose other than qualified education ex- Generally, you figure the deduction using thepenses, you cannot deduct any interest paid on Student Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet inthe refinanced loan. the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions.Interest paid by others. If you are the person
However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ,legally obligated to make interest payments andVoluntary interest payments. These are or 4563, or you are excluding income fromsomeone else makes a payment of interest onpayments made on a qualified student loan dur- sources within Puerto Rico, you must completeyour behalf, you are treated as receiving theing a period when interest payments are not Worksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Publication 970.payments from the other person and, in turn,required, such as when the borrower has been To help you figure your student loan interestpaying the interest. See chapter 4 of Publicationgranted a deferment or the loan has not yet deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E,970 for more information.entered repayment status. Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, an
institution (such as a bank or governmental
agency) that received interest payments of $600No Double Benefit AllowedDo Not Include as Interest or more during 2010 on one or more qualified
You cannot deduct as interest on a student loan student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac-You cannot claim a student loan interest deduc- any amount that is an allowable deduction under ceptable substitute) to each borrower by Janu-tion for any of the following items. any other provision of the tax law (for example, ary 31, 2011.
• Interest you paid on a loan if, under the home mortgage interest). For qualified student loans taken out before
terms of the loan, you are not legally obli- September 1, 2004, the institution is required to
gated to make interest payments. include on Form 1098-E only payments of statedHow Much Can You interest. Other interest payments, such as cer-• Loan origination fees that are payments Deduct tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter-for property or services provided by the
est, may not appear on the form you receive.lender, such as commitment fees or Your student loan interest deduction for 2010 is However, if you pay qualifying interest that is notprocessing costs. generally the smaller of: included on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct• Interest you paid on a loan to the extent those amounts. For information on allocating• $2,500, orpayments were made through your partici- payments between interest and principal, seepation in the National Health Service • The interest you paid in 2010. chapter 4 of Publication 970. Corps Loan Repayment Program (the  To claim the deduction, enter the allowableªNHSC Loan Repayment Programº) or However, the amount determined above is amount on Form 1040, line 33, or Form 1040A,certain other loan repayment assistance phased out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is line 18.programs. For more information, see Stu- between $60,000 and $75,000 ($120,000 and
dent Loan Repayment Assistance in chap- $150,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot
ter 5 of Publication 970. 
Can You Claim the
Deduction
Generally, you can claim the deduction if all four
of the following requirements are met.
Page 136 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 139 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction and each itemized deduc-
Itemized tion. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider when deciding whether to
subtract the standard deduction or itemized deductions.
Deductions
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking If an exemption for you can be claimed
on another person's return (such asa standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-
your parents' return), your standardtions. If you have a choice, you can use the
CAUTION
!
deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-20. method that gives you the lower tax.
tion for Dependents, later.The standard deduction is a dollar amount
that reduces the amount of income on which you
are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need Useful ItemsStandard for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions, You may want to see:
such as medical expenses, charitable contribu-
Form (and Instructions)tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.Deduction The standard deduction is higher for taxpayers ❏ Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040)who: Standard Deduction for Certain
Filers• Are 65 or older,
What's New • Are blind,
• Have a net disaster loss in 2010 becauseStandard deduction increased. The stan- of a disaster that occurred before 2010dard deduction for some taxpayers who do not Standard Deductionand was declared a federal disaster afteritemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form 2007, or Amount1040 is higher in 2010 than it was in 2009. The
• Paid state or local sales or excise taxesamount depends on your filing status. In addition
(or certain other taxes or fees in a stateto the annual increase for some taxpayers due
without a sales tax) in 2010 on theto inflation adjustments, your 2010 standard de-
purchase of a new motor vehicle afterduction is increased by: The standard deduction amount depends onFebruary 16, 2009, and before 2010.   your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or• Any state or local sales or excise taxes
blind, whether an exemption can be claimed foryou paid in 2010 on the purchase of a new At the time this publication went to you by another taxpayer, whether you have amotor vehicle after February 16, 2009, and print, Congress was considering legis- net disaster loss from a federally declared disas-before 2010, and lation that would provide an increased ter, and whether you paid state or local sales or
CAUTION
!
standard deduction for real estate taxes or a net• Any net disaster loss you had in 2010 be- excise tax (or certain other taxes or fees in a
disaster loss from a disaster occurring in 2010.cause of a disaster that occurred before state without a sales tax) in 2010 on the
To find out if this legislation was enacted, and for purchase of a new motor vehicle after February2010 and was declared a federal disaster
16, 2009, and before 2010. Generally, the stan-more details, see Schedule L (Form 1040A orafter 2007.
dard deduction amounts are adjusted each year1040) or www.irs.gov/formspubs.You can use the 2010 Standard Deduction for inflation. Use Worksheet 20-1 to figure your
Worksheet in this chapter to figure your stan- You benefit from the standard deduc- standard deduction amount.
tion if your standard deduction is moredard deduction. But to increase your standard
Decedent's final return. The amount of thethan the total of your allowable item-deduction by taxes paid on the purchase of a
TIP standard deduction for a decedent's final taxized deductions.new motor vehicle or a net disaster loss, you return is the same as it would have been had themust use Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and decedent continued to live. However, if the de-attach it to your return. Persons not eligible for the standard deduc- cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you the higher standard deduction for age cannot beAt the time this publication went to should itemize any deductions you have if: claimed.print, Congress was considering legis- • Your filing status is married filing sepa-lation that would provide an increased
CAUTION
! rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-standard deduction for real estate taxes or a net Higher Standard Deductiontions on his or her return,disaster loss from a disaster occurring in 2010. for Age (65 or Older)To find out if this legislation was enacted, and for • You are filing a tax return for a short tax
more details, see Schedule L (Form 1040A or year because of a change in your annual If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
accounting period, or1040) or IRS.gov. to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65
or older at the end of the year. You are consid-• You are a nonresident or dual-status alien ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.during the year. You are considered a Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi- duction for 2010 if you were born before Januarydent and resident alien during the year.Introduction 2, 1946.Note. If you are a nonresident alien who isThis chapter discusses the following topics. married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at
the end of the year, you can choose to be• How to figure the amount of your standard Higher Standard Deduction
treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publicationdeduction. for Blindness519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you• The standard deduction for dependents. make this choice, you can take the stan- If you are blind on the last day of the year and
• Who should itemize deductions. dard deduction. you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 137

Page 140 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to a higher standard deduction. You qualify for complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and standard deduction amount, generally
this benefit if you are totally or partly blind. attach it to your return. $5,700).
You cannot increase your standard de-Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you must However, the standard deduction may beduction by any net disaster loss from aget a certified statement from an eye doctor or higher if the individual is 65 or older or blind, paiddisaster that occurred in 2010. How-
CAUTION
!registered optometrist that: state or local sales or excise taxes on theever, at the time this publication went to print, purchase of a new motor vehicle, or had a net• You cannot see better than 20/200 in the Congress was considering legislation that would disaster loss from a federally declared disaster.better eye with glasses or contact lenses, provide an increased standard deduction for a If an exemption for you (or your spouse if youor net disaster loss from a disaster occurring in are filing jointly) can be claimed on someone2010. To find out if this legislation was enacted,• Your field of vision is not more than 20 else's return, use Worksheet 20-1 to determineand for more details, see Schedule L (Formdegrees. your standard deduction.1040A or 1040) or www.irs.gov/formspubs.
Earned income defined. Earned income isIf your eye condition will never improve be- salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andyond these limits, the statement should include other amounts received as pay for work youExamplesthis fact. You must keep the statement in your actually perform.records. The following examples illustrate how to deter-  For purposes of the standard deduction,If your vision can be corrected beyond these mine your standard deduction using Worksheet earned income also includes any part of a schol-limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 20-1. arship or fellowship grant that you must includeonly briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,
in your gross income. See Scholarships andyou can take the higher standard deduction for Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are fellowships in chapter 12 for more informationblindness if you otherwise qualify. filing a joint return for 2010. Neither is blind, and on what qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They did grant.
not pay sales or excise taxes on the purchase ofSpouse 65 or Older or Blind a new motor vehicle or have a net disaster loss. Example 1. Michael is single. His parents
They decide not to itemize their deductions. Be- claim an exemption for him on their 2010 taxYou can take the higher standard deduction if
cause they are married filing jointly, they enter return. He has interest income of $780 andyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
$11,400 on line 1 of Worksheet 20-1 . They wages of $150. He did not pay sales or excise• You file a joint return, or check the ªNoº box on line 2, so they also enter taxes on the purchase of a new motor vehicle or
$11,400 on lines 4 and 7. Their standard deduc- have a net disaster loss. He has no itemized• You file a separate return and can claim
tion is $11,400. deductions. Michael uses Worksheet 20-1  toan exemption for your spouse because
find his standard deduction. Because he is sin-your spouse had no gross income and an
Example 2. The facts are the same as in gle, he enters $5,700 on line 1. He checks theexemption for your spouse could not be
Example 1 except that Larry is blind at the end of ªYesº box on line 2, enters $950 on line 3, andclaimed by another taxpayer.
2010, so he and Donna enter $1,100 on line 5 of also enters $950 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3)
Worksheet 20-1 . They then enter $12,500 on line 4. He leaves lines 5 and 6 blank andYou cannot claim the higher standard ($11,400 + $1,100) on line 7, so their standard enters $950 on line 7. His standard deduction isdeduction for an individual other than deduction is $12,500. $950.yourself and your spouse.
CAUTION
!
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-
return for 2010. Both are over age 65. Neither is lege student, is claimed on his parents' 2010 tax
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depen- return. Joe is married and files a separate return.Higher Standard Deduction for dent. They did not pay sales or excise taxes on His wife does not itemize deductions on herSales Taxes on New Motor the purchase of a new motor vehicle or have a separate return. Joe has $1,500 in interest in-Vehicles net disaster loss. They do not itemize deduc- come and wages of $3,800. He did not pay sales
tions, so they use Worksheet 20-1 . Because or excise taxes on the purchase of a new motorYour standard deduction is increased by any they are married filing jointly, they enter $11,400 vehicle or have a net disaster loss. He has nostate or local sales or excise taxes you paid in on line 1. They check the ªNoº box on line 2, so itemized deductions. Joe finds his standard de-2010 on the purchase of a new vehicle after they also enter $11,400 on line 4. Because they duction by using Worksheet 20-1. Because he isFebruary 16, 2009, and before 2010. are both over age 65, they enter $2,200 ($1,100 married filing a separate return, he entersIf you bought the vehicle in 2010, you cannot ×  2) on line 5. They enter $13,600 ($11,400 + $5,700 on line 1. He checks the ªYesº box onincrease your standard deduction by any taxes $2,200) on line 7, so their standard deduction is line 2, enters $4,100 ($3,800 + $300) on line 3,you paid on the purchase. $13,600. and also enters $4,100 (the smaller of line 1 andThe amount is limited to tax on the first line 3) on line 4. He leaves lines 5 and 6 blank$49,500 of the purchase price. The taxes must Example 4. The facts are the same as in and enters $4,100 on line 7. His standard deduc-be state or local sales or excise taxes that would Example 3 except that Bill and Lisa had a $8,000 tion is $4,100.be deductible on Form 1040 (Schedule A) if you net disaster loss from a federally declared disas-were itemizing your deductions. In states with- ter that occurred in 2009. That is the amount on Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimedout a sales tax, certain other taxes or fees qual- line 17 of their Form 4684. They enter $8,000 on on her parents' 2010 return. She is 18 years oldify if they are assessed on the purchase of the line 6 of Worksheet 20-1. On line 7 of the work- and blind. She has interest income of $1,300vehicle and are based on the vehicle's sales sheet, they enter $21,600 ($11,400 + $2,200 + and wages of $2,900. She did not pay sales orprice or as a per unit fee. Taxes deductible in $8,000), which is their standard deduction. Be- excise taxes on the purchase of a new motorarriving at adjusted gross income, such as taxes cause line 6 is greater than zero, they must vehicle or have a net disaster loss. She has noon a vehicle used in your business, cannot be complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and itemized deductions. Amy finds her standardused to increase your standard deduction. attach it to their return. deduction by using Worksheet 20-1 . BecauseIf you are increasing your standard deduc- she is single, she enters $5,700 on line 1. Shetion by the amount of these state or local sales checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $3,200or excise taxes, complete Schedule L (Form ($2,900 + $300) on line 3, and also enters1040A or 1040) and attach it to your return. $3,200 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4.Standard Deduction Because she is blind, she enters $1,400 on line
5. She enters $4,600 ($3,200 + $1,400) on linefor DependentsHigher Standard Deduction for Net 7. Her standard deduction is $4,600.Disaster Loss
The standard deduction for an individual for
Your standard deduction is increased by any net whom an exemption can be claimed on another
disaster loss you had in 2010 because of a person's tax return is generally limited to the
disaster that occurred before 2010 and was de- greater of: Who Should Itemize
clared a federal disaster after 2007. This amount • $950, oris on Form 4684, line 17. You should itemize deductions if your total de-
If you are increasing your standard deduc- • The individual's earned income for the ductions are more than the standard deduction
tion by the amount of your net disaster loss, year + $300 (but not more than the regular amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not
Page 138 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 141 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed • Have total itemized deductions that are have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc-
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan- more than the standard deduction to which tions and later find you should not have Ð you
dard deduction. you otherwise are entitled. can change your return by filing Form 1040X,
 You should first figure your itemized deduc- Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.These deductions are explained in chapterstions and compare that amount to your standard See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in21±28.deduction to make sure you are using the chapter 1 for more information on amended re-If you decide to itemize your deductions, com-method that gives you the greater benefit. turns.plete Schedule A and attach it to your FormWhen to itemize. You may benefit from 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line Married persons who filed separate re-itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 29, on Form 1040, line 40. turns. You can change methods of taking de-1040) if you:
ductions only if you and your spouse both makeElecting to itemize for state tax or other pur-• Do not qualify for the standard deduction, the same changes. Both of you must file a con-poses. Even if your itemized deductions areor the amount you can claim is limited, sent to assessment for any additional tax eitherless than the amount of your standard deduc-
• Had large uninsured medical and dental one may owe as a result of the change.tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your
expenses during the year, federal return rather than take the standard de- You and your spouse can use the methodduction. You may want to do this, for example, if• Paid interest and taxes on your home, that gives you the lower total tax, even thoughthe tax benefit of being able to itemize your one of you may pay more tax than you would• Had large unreimbursed employee busi- deductions on your state tax return is greater have paid by using the other method. You bothness expenses or other miscellaneous de- than the tax benefit you lose on your federal
ductions, must use the same method of claiming deduc-return by not taking the standard deduction. To
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the othermake this election, you must check the box on• Had large uninsured casualty or theft
line 30 of Schedule A. should itemize because he or she will not qualifylosses,
for the standard deduction. See Persons not• Made large contributions to qualified chari- Changing your mind. If you do not itemize eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.ties, or your deductions and later find that you should
Worksheet 20-1. 2010 Standard Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. If your filing status is married filing separate and your spouse itemizes deductions on his or her return, or if you are a dual-status alien, do
not complete this worksheet. You cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1946, are blind, had a net disaster
loss, or paid state or local sales or excise tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle.
If you paid state or local sales or excise tax in 2010 on the purchase of a new motor vehicle after February 16, 2009, and before 2010, you
cannot use this worksheet to figure your standard deduction. You must use Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your return.
If you are filing Form 1040EZ, do not use this worksheet. Instead, see line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
1. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
• Single or married filing separately Ð $5,700
...................... . 1.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) Ð
$11,400 }
• Head of household Ð $8,400
2. Can you (or your spouse if filing jointly) be claimed as a dependent on someone else's
return?
 No. Skip line 3; enter the amount from line 1 on line 4, and go to line 5. 
 Yes. Go to line 3.
3. Is your earned income* more than $650?
 Yes. Add $300 to your earned income. Enter the total } ...................... . 3.
 No. Enter $950
4. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 3 .................................................... . 4.
5. If born before January 2, 1946, or blind, multiply the number on Form 1040, line 39a (or Form 1040A, line
23a**) by $1,100 ($1,400 if single or head of household). Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 5.
6. Enter any net disaster loss from Form 4684, line 17** ....................................... . 6.
7.  Add lines 4, 5, and 6. This is your standard deduction for 2010. ............................. . 7.
*Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income. Generally, your earned income is the total of the amount(s)
you reported on Form 1040, lines 7, 12, and 18, minus the amount, if any, on line 27 (or the amount you reported on Form 1040A, line 7). 
**If the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you must complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your return.
Also, if the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you cannot file Form 1040A, you must file Form 1040.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 139

Page 142 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How Much of theWhat Are Medical21. Expenses Can YouExpenses? Deduct?Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis,
Medical and cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis- You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only
ease, and the costs for treatments affecting any the amount of your medical and dental ex-
part or function of the body. These expenses penses that is more than 7.5% of your AGIDental Expenses
(Form 1040, line 38).include payments for legal medical services ren-
In this chapter, the term ª7.5% limitº is useddered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and
to refer to 7.5% of your AGI. The phrase ªsubjectother medical practitioners. They include the
to the 7.5% limitº is also used. This phraseWhat's New costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnostic means that you must subtract 7.5% (.075) ofdevices needed for these purposes. your AGI from your medical expenses to figureStandard mileage rate. The standard mile- Medical care expenses must be primarily to your medical expense deduction.age rate allowed for operating expenses for a alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defectcar when you use it for medical reasons is 16.5 Example. Your AGI is $40,000, 7.5% ofor illness. Do not include expenses that arecents per mile. See Transportation under What which is $3,000. You paid medical expenses ofmerely beneficial to general health, such as vita-Medical Expenses Are Includible. $2,500. You cannot deduct any of your medicalmins or a vacation. expenses because they are not more than 7.5%COBRA Premium Assistance. If you involun- Medical expenses include the premiums you of your AGI.tarily lost your job after August 31, 2008, and pay for insurance that covers the expenses ofbefore June 1, 2010, you may qualify for a 65%
medical care, and the amounts you pay forreduction in premiums for COBRA continuation
transportation to get medical care. Medical ex-coverage for up to 15 months. There are also
penses also include amounts paid for qualified Whose Medicalspecial rules for individuals who lost their health
long-term care services and limited amountscoverage because of a reduction in working
Expensespaid for any qualified long-term care insurancehours. The premium reduction is not included in
your gross income. You cannot claim the health contract. Can You Include?coverage tax credit for any month that you re-
ceive this premium. Also, certain TAA-eligible You can generally include medical expensesand PBGC recipients qualify for an extension of you pay for yourself as well as those you pay forCOBRA benefits. someone who was your spouse or your depen-What Expenses Can For more information, see Publication 502, dent either when the services were provided orMedical and Dental Expenses. when you paid for them. There are different rulesYou Include This Year?
for decedents and for individuals who are the
subject of multiple support agreements. SeeYou can include only the medical and dental
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-expenses you paid this year, regardless of when ment, later.Introduction the services were provided. If you pay medical
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliverThis chapter will help you determine the follow-
Yourselfing. the check generally is the date of payment. If
you use a ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account to• What medical expenses are. You can include medical expenses you paid forpay your medical expenses, the date reported yourself.• What expenses you can include this year. on the statement of the financial institution
showing when payment was made is the date of• How much of the expenses you can de-
Spouseduct. payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-
cal expenses you charge to your credit card in• Whose medical expenses you can include. You can include medical expenses you paid forthe year the charge is made, not when you your spouse. To include these expenses, you• What medical expenses are includible. actually pay the amount charged. must have been married either at the time your
• How to treat reimbursements. spouse received the medical services or at the
time you paid the medical expenses.• How to report the deduction on your tax Separate returns. If you and your spouse live
return. in a noncommunity property state and file sepa- Example 1. Mary received medical treat-
rate returns, each of you can include only the• How to report impairment-related work ex- ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for the
penses. medical expenses you actually paid. Any medi- treatment after they married. Bill can include
these expenses in figuring his medical expensecal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-• How to report health insurance costs if you deduction even if Bill and Mary file separatecount in which you and your spouse have theare self-employed. returns.same interest are considered to have been paid If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could notequally by each of you, unless you can show include Mary's expenses on his separate return.Useful Items otherwise. Mary would include the amounts she paid duringYou may want to see: Community property states. If you and the year in her separate return. If they filed a
joint return, the medical expenses both paidyour spouse live in a community property statePublications during the year would be used to figure theirand file separate returns, any medical expenses
medical expense deduction.❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses paid out of community funds are divided equally.
Each of you should include half the expenses. If❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other Example 2. This year, John paid medicalmedical expenses are paid out of the separateTax-Favored Health Plans expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid John married Belle this year and they file a jointForm (and Instructions) the medical expenses can include them. If you return. Because John was married to Louise
live in a community property state, are married, when she received the medical services, he can❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized and file a separate return, see Publication 555, include those expenses in figuring his medicalDeductions Community Property. expense deduction for this year.
Page 140 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 143 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
substantiate that the payment is directly attribu- Support claimed under a multiple supportDependent table to the medical care of the child. agreement. If you are considered to have pro-
vided more than half of a qualifying relative'sYou can include medical expenses you paid for But if you pay the agency or other person for
support under a multiple support agreement,your dependent. For you to include these ex- medical care that was provided and paid for
penses, the person must have been your depen- you can include medical expenses you pay forbefore adoption negotiations began, you cannotdent either at the time the medical services were that person. A multiple support agreement isinclude them as medical expenses.provided or at the time you paid the expenses. A used when two or more people provide moreYou may be able to take an adoptionperson generally qualifies as your dependent for than half of a person's support, but no one alonecredit for other expenses related to anpurposes of the medical expense deduction if provides more than half.adoption. See the Instructions for Formboth of the following requirements are met.
TIP
For rules regarding what expenses you can8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined information. include this year, see What Expenses Can You
later) or a qualifying relative (defined later), Include This Year, earlier.and Any medical expenses paid by others whoChild of divorced or separated parents. For2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, joined you in the agreement cannot be includedpurposes of the medical and dental expensesor a resident of the United States, Canada, as medical expenses by anyone. However, youdeduction, a child of divorced or separated par-or Mexico. If your qualifying child was can include the entire unreimbursed amount youents can be treated as a dependent of bothadopted, see Exception for adopted child, paid for medical expenses.parents. Each parent can include the medicalnext.
expenses he or she pays for the child, even if theYou can include medical expenses you paid for Example. You and your three brothers eachother parent claims the child's dependency ex-an individual that would have been your depen- provide one-fourth of your mother's total sup-emption, if:dent except that: port. Under a multiple support agreement, you
treat your mother as your dependent. You paid1. The child is in the custody of one or both1. He or she received gross income of $3,650 all of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim-parents for more than half the year,or more in 2010,
bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses.2. The child receives over half of his or her2. He or she filed a joint return for 2010, or In figuring your medical expense deduction, yousupport during the year from his or her3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could can include only one-fourth of your mother'sparents, andbe claimed as a dependent on someone medical expenses. Your brothers cannot include
3. The child's parents:else's 2010 return. any part of the expenses. However, if you and
your brothers share the nonmedical supporta. Are divorced or legally separated under
items and you separately pay all of yourException for adopted child. If you are a a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
mother's medical expenses, you can include theU.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted nance,
unreimbursed amount you paid for her medicalchild lived with you as a member of your house- b. Are separated under a written separa-hold for 2010, that child does not have to be a expenses in your medical expenses.tion agreement, orU.S. citizen or national or a resident of the
United States, Canada, or Mexico. c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 Decedent
months of the year.
Medical expenses paid before death by the de-Qualifying Child This does not apply if the child's exemption is cedent are included in figuring any deduction for
being claimed under a multiple support agree- medical and dental expenses on the decedent'sA qualifying child is a child who: ment (discussed later). final income tax return. This includes expenses
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster for the decedent's spouse and dependents as
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- well as for the decedent.Qualifying Relativeter, half brother, half sister, or a descen- The survivor or personal representative of adant of any of them (for example, your
decedent can choose to treat certain expensesA qualifying relative is a person:grandchild, niece, or nephew),
paid by the decedent's estate for the decedent's2. Was: 1. Who is your: medical care as paid by the decedent at the time
the medical services were provided. The ex-a. Under age 19 at the end of 2010 and a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or
penses must be paid within the 1-year periodyounger than you (or your spouse, if a descendant of any of them (for exam-
beginning with the day after the date of death. Iffiling jointly), ple, your grandchild),
you are the survivor or personal representativeb. Under age 24 at the end of 2010, a b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, making this choice, you must attach a statementfull-time student, and younger than you or a son or daughter of either of them, to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the decedent's(or your spouse, if filing jointly), or
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib- amended return, Form 1040X) saying that thec. Any age and permanently and totally ling of either of them (for example, your expenses have not been and will not be claimeddisabled, grandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un- on the estate tax return.
cle),3. Lived with you for more than half of 2010, Qualified medical expenses paid
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, before death by the decedent are not4. Did not provide over half of his or her own deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-stepmother, son-in-law, daugh-
CAUTION
!support for 2010, and bution from any Archer MSA, Medicare Advan-ter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
5. Did not file a joint return, other than to tage MSA, or health savings account.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
claim a refund. Amended returns and claims for refund aree. Any other person (other than your
discussed in chapter 1.spouse) who lived with you all year as aAdopted child. A legally adopted child is member of your household if your rela-treated as your own child. This includes a child tionship did not violate local law, What if you pay medical expenses of a de-lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. ceased spouse or dependent? If you paidYou can include medical expenses that you 2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali- medical expenses for your deceased spouse orpaid for a child before adoption if the child quali- fying Child earlier) of any other person for dependent, include them as medical expensesfied as your dependent when the medical serv- 2010, and on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whetherices were provided or when the expenses were
they are paid before or after the decedent's3. For whom you provided over half of thepaid.
death. The expenses can be included if thesupport in 2010. But see Child of divorcedIf you pay back an adoption agency or other
person was your spouse or dependent either ator separated parents, earlier, and Supportpersons for medical expenses they paid under
the time the medical services were provided orclaimed under a multiple support agree-an agreement with you, you are treated as hav-
at the time you paid the expenses.ment, next.ing paid those expenses provided you clearly
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 141

Page 144 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact amount paid is included in box 1 of your Form
W-2.lenses, orWhat Medical • Long-term care (subject to additional limi- Example. You are a federal employee par-tations). See Qualified Long-term Care In-Expenses Are ticipating in the premium conversion plan of thesurance Contracts in Publication 502. Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-
Includible? gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paidIf you have a policy that provides payments for by making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.other than medical care, you can include theUse Table 21-1 below, as a guide to determine Because you are an employee whose insurancepremiums for the medical care part of the policywhich medical and dental expenses you can premiums are paid with money that is neverif the charge for the medical part is reasonable.include on Schedule A (Form 1040). included in your gross income, you cannot de-The cost of the medical part must be separately duct the premiums paid with that money.This table does not include all possible medi- stated in the insurance contract or given to you
cal expenses. To determine if an expense not Long-term care services. Contributionsin a separate statement.
listed can be included in figuring your medical made by your employer to provide coverage for
expense deduction, see What Are Medical Ex- qualified long-term care services under a flexibleNote. When figuring the amount of insur-
penses, earlier. spending or similar arrangement must be in-ance premiums you can include in medical ex-
cluded in your income. This amount will be re-penses on Schedule A, do not include any
ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.health coverage tax credit advance paymentsInsurance Premiums shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Cover- Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).age Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments.You can include in medical expenses insurance If you have medical expenses that are reim-
premiums you pay for policies that cover medi- bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-Employer-sponsored health insurance plan.cal care. Medical care policies can provide pay- ment, you cannot include those expenses inDo not include in your medical and dental ex- your medical expenses. This is because an HRAment for treatment that includes: penses any insurance premiums paid by an em- is funded solely by the employer.ployer-sponsored health insurance plan unless• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays,
the premiums are included in box 1 of your Form Retired public safety officers. If you are a• Prescription drugs and insulin, W-2. Also, do not include any other medical and retired public safety officer, do not include as
• Dental care, dental expenses paid by the plan unless the medical expenses any health or long-term care
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist See Publication 502 for more information for these and other
expenses.
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance included
• Birth control pills prescribed insurance premiums in a car insurance policy• Bottled water
by your doctor covering all persons• Oxygen equipment and • Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your car• Body scan oxygen (see Publication 969)
• Medicine you buy without a• Capital expenses for • Part of life-care fee paid to • Diaper service
prescriptionequipment or improvements retirement home designated • Expenses for your general
to your home needed for for medical care • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following your
medical care (see the baby• Physical examination doctor's advice) such asÐ
worksheet in Publication • Prescription drugs you• Pregnancy test kit ÐHealth club dues
502) brought in (or orderedÐHousehold help (even if• Prescription medicines
• Diagnostic devices shipped) from anotherrecommended by a doctor)(prescribed by a doctor) and
country, in most cases• Expenses of an organ ÐSocial activities, such asinsulin
donor dancing or swimming lessons • Nutritional supplements,• Psychiatric and
ÐTrip for general health vitamins, herbal• Eye surgeryÐto promote psychological treatment
improvement supplements, ªnaturalthe correct function of the • Social security tax, medicines,º etc., unlesseye • Flexible spending accountMedicare tax, FUTA, and recommended by areimbursements for medical• Fertility enhancement, state employment tax for medical practitioner as aexpenses (if contributionscertain procedures worker providing medical treatment for a specificwere on a pre-tax basis)• Guide dogs or other care (see Wages for medical condition• Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, nursing services, below) diagnosed by a physicianexpensesdeaf, and disabled • Special items (artificial • Surgery for purely• Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab limbs, false teeth, cosmetic reasonspayments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing eye-glasses, contact
• Toothpaste, toiletries,expenses services, surgery, etc.) lenses, hearing aids,
cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.) • Illegal operation or treatment• Lead-based paint removal
• Teeth whitening• Special education for • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion
• Weight-loss expenses notmentally or physically protection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent for the treatment of obesitydisabled persons providing payment for loss ofhaving children such as a or other diseaselife, limb, sight, etc.• Stop-smoking programsvasectomy or tubal ligation
• Maternity clothes• Transportation for needed• Long-term care contracts,
medical carequalified
• Treatment at a drug or• Meals and lodging provided
alcohol center (includesby a hospital during medical
meals and lodging providedtreatment
by the center)• Medical services fees (from
• Wages for nursing servicesdoctors, dentists, surgeons,
specialists, and other • Weight-loss, certain
medical practitioners) expenses for obesity
• Medicare Part D premiums
Page 142 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 145 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
premiums that you elect to have paid with • There is no significant element of personal Transportation expenses you cannot in-
tax-free distributions from your retirement plan. pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the clude. You cannot include in medical ex-
This applies only to distributions that would oth- travel away from home. penses the cost of transportation expenses in
erwise be included in income. the following situations.The amount you include in medical expenses for
lodging cannot be more than $50 for each night • Going to and from work, even if your con-Medicare A. If you are covered under social
for each person. You can include lodging for asecurity (or if you are a government employee dition requires an unusual means of trans-
person traveling with the person receiving thewho paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled in portation.
Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A medical care. For example, if a parent is travel- • Travel for purely personal reasons to an-is not a medical expense. ing with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be other city for an operation or other medicalIf you are not covered under social security included as a medical expense for lodging. care.(or were not a government employee who paid Meals are not included.
Medicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medi- • Travel that is merely for the general im-
care A. In this situation you can include the Nursing home. You can include in medical provement of one's health.
premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medical expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing • The costs of operating a speciallyexpense. home, home for the aged, or similar institution, equipped car for other than medical rea-for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.Medicare B. Medicare B is supplemental sons.This includes the cost of meals and lodging inmedical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi- the home if a principal reason for being there iscare B are a medical expense. Check the infor- to get medical care.mation you received from the Social Security Disabled DependentDo not include the cost of meals and lodgingAdministration to find out your premium. Care Expensesif the reason for being in the home is personal.
Medicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre- You can, however, include in medical expenses Some disabled dependent care expenses mayscription drug insurance program for persons the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing qualify as either:with Medicare A or B. You can include as a care.
medical expense premiums you pay for Medi- • Medical expenses orcare D. Transportation • Work-related expenses for purposes of
Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums taking a credit for dependent care. (See
Include in medical expenses amounts paid foryou pay before you are age 65 for insurance for chapter 32.)transportation primarily for, and essential to,medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your You can choose to apply them either way asmedical care. You can include:dependents after you reach age 65 are medical long as you do not use the same expenses tocare expenses in the year paid if they are: • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu- claim both a credit and a medical expense de-lance service,• Payable in equal yearly installments, or duction.more often, and • Transportation expenses of a parent who
• Payable for at least 10 years, or until you must go with a child who needs medical
reach age 65 (but not for less than 5 care,
years). How Do You Treat• Transportation expenses of a nurse or
other person who can give injections,
Reimbursements?Unused sick leave used to pay premiums. medications, or other treatment required
You must include in gross income cash pay- by a patient who is traveling to get medical
You can include in medical expenses only thosements you receive at the time of retirement for care and is unable to travel alone, and
amounts paid during the taxable year for whichunused sick leave. You also must include in • Transportation expenses for regular visits you received no insurance or other reimburse-gross income the value of unused sick leave to see a mentally ill dependent, if thesethat, at your option, your employer applies to the ment.visits are recommended as a part of treat-cost of your continuing participation in your em-
ment.ployer's health plan after you retire. You can Insurance Reimbursementinclude this cost of continuing participation in the
health plan as a medical expense. Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket You must reduce your total medical expensesIf you participate in a health plan where your expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, when for the year by all reimbursements for medicalemployer automatically applies the value of un- you use your car for medical reasons. You can- expenses that you receive from insurance orused sick leave to the cost of your continuing not include depreciation, insurance, general re- other sources during the year. This includesparticipation in the health plan (and you do not pair, or maintenance expenses. payments from Medicare.have the option to receive cash), do not include If you do not want to use your actual ex- Even if a policy provides reimbursement forthe value of the unused sick leave in gross penses for 2010, you can use a standard medi- only certain specific medical expenses, youincome. You cannot include this cost of continu- cal mileage rate of 16.5 cents a mile in 2010. must use amounts you receive from that policying participation in that health plan as a medical
 You can also include parking fees and tolls. to reduce your total medical expenses, includingexpense.
You can add these fees and tolls to your medical those it does not provide reimbursement for.
expenses whether you use actual expenses orMeals and Lodging Example. You have insurance policies thatuse the standard mileage rate.
cover your hospital and doctors' bills but notYou can include in medical expenses the cost of Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for your nursing bills. The insurance you receive formeals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu- medical reasons during the year. He spent $400 the hospital and doctors' bills is more than theirtion if a principal reason for being there is to get for gas, $30 for oil, and $100 for tolls and park- charges. In figuring your medical deduction, youmedical care. See Nursing home, later. ing. He wants to figure the amount he can in- must reduce the total amount you spent for med-You may be able to include in medical ex- clude in medical expenses both ways to see ical care by the total amount of insurance youpenses the cost of lodging not provided in a which gives him the greater deduction. received, even if the policies do not cover somehospital or similar institution. You can include
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds of your medical expenses.the cost of such lodging while away from home if
the $400 for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 forall of the following requirements are met.
tolls and parking for a total of $530. Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).• The lodging is primarily for and essential He then figures the standard mileage A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-to medical care. amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 16.5 ployer-funded plan that reimburses employees
• The medical care is provided by a doctor cents a mile for a total of $462. He then adds the for medical care expenses and allows unused
in a licensed hospital or in a medical care $100 in tolls and parking for a total of $562. amounts to be carried forward. An HRA isfacility related to, or the equivalent of, a funded solely by the employer and the reim-Bill includes the $562 of car expenses withlicensed hospital. bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi-his other medical expenses for the year because
the $562 is more than the $530 he figured using mum dollar amount for a coverage period, are• The lodging is not lavish or extravagant
actual expenses. not included in your income.under the circumstances.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 143

Page 146 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$500 in medical expenses, you do not include
the amount reimbursed in your gross income.
Damages for Personal
Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a
personal injury suit, part of that award may be for
medical expenses that you deducted in an ear-
lier year. If it is, you must include that part in your
income in the year you receive it to the extent it
reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
See Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussed
under How Do You Treat Reimbursements, ear-
lier.
Future medical expenses. If you receive an
amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-
sonal injuries, part of that award may be for
future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-
duce any future medical expenses for these
injuries until the amount you received has been
completely used.
How Do You Figure
and Report the
Deduction on Your 
Tax Return?
Once you have determined which medical ex-
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
penses you can include, you figure and reportOther reimbursements. Generally, you do Premiums paid by you and your employer. the deduction on your tax return.If both you and your employer contribute to yournot reduce medical expenses by payments you
medical insurance plan and your employer'sreceive for:
contributions are not included in your gross in- What Tax Form Do You• Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem- come, you must include in your gross incomeber or function of the body (loss of limb, Use?the part of your excess reimbursement that issight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to the from your employer's contribution. You figure your medical expense deduction onextent the payment is based on the nature See Publication 502 to figure the amount of lines 1 ±4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-of the injury without regard to the amount the excess reimbursement you must include in not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A, orof time lost from work, or gross income. Form 1040EZ. If you need more information on• Loss of earnings. itemized deductions or you are not sure if youReimbursement in a later year. If you are can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.reimbursed in a later year for medical expensesYou must, however, reduce your medical ex- you deducted in an earlier year, you generally Enter the amount you paid for medical andpenses by any part of these payments that is must report the reimbursement as income up to dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (Formdesignated for medical costs. See How Do You the amount you previously deducted as medical 1040). This should be your expenses that wereFigure and Report the Deduction on Your Tax expenses. not reimbursed by insurance or any otherReturn, later. However, do not report as income the sources.For how to treat damages received for per- amount of reimbursement you received up to the You can deduct only the amount of yoursonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per- amount of your medical deductions that did not medical and dental expenses that is more thansonal Injuries, later. reduce your tax for the earlier year. For more 7.5% of your AGI shown on line 38, Form 1040.You do not have a medical deduction if you information about the recovery of an amount For an example, see the partial Schedule A ,are reimbursed for all of your medical expenses that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an later.for the year. earlier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries
in chapter 12.  
Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-
Medical expenses not deducted. If you didbursed more than your medical expenses, you
not deduct a medical expense in the year youmay have to include the excess in income. You Impairment-Relatedpaid it because your medical expenses were notmay want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide
more than 7.5% of your AGI, or because you didif any of your reimbursement is taxable. Work Expensesnot itemize deductions, do not include the reim-Premiums paid by you. If you pay either bursement up to the amount of the expense in If you are a person with a disability, you can takethe entire premium for your medical insurance or income. However, if the reimbursement is more a business deduction for expenses that are nec-all of the costs of a plan similar to medical than the expense, see Excess reimbursement, essary for you to be able to work. If you take ainsurance and your insurance payments or other earlier. business deduction for these impair-reimbursements are more than your total medi-
ment-related work expenses, they are not sub-cal expenses for the year, you have an excess Example. Last year, you had medical ex- ject to the 7.5% limit that applies to medicalreimbursement. Generally, you do not include penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500 expenses.the excess reimbursement in your gross in- because it is less than 7.5% of your AGI. If, in a
come. You have a disability if you have:later year, you are reimbursed for any of the
Page 144 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 147 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE A  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Itemized Deductions
a Attach to Form 1040.            a See Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 07 
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Medical 
and 
Dental  
Expenses 
Caution.  Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others. 
1 Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1) ......  1 
2 Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38 2 
3 Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075) ........... 3 
4 Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0- ........ 4 
Bill and Helen Jones 000-00-0000
3,434
33,000
2,475
959
• A physical or mental disability (for exam- were under age 27 at the end of 2010. For this
ple, blindness or deafness) that function- purpose, you were self-employed if you were a
ally limits your being employed, or general partner (or a limited partner receiving
22.guaranteed payments) or you received wages• A physical or mental impairment (for ex- from an S corporation in which you were moreample, a sight or hearing impairment) that than a 2% shareholder. The insurance plansubstantially limits one or more of your must be established under your trade or busi-major life activities, such as performing Taxesness and the deduction cannot be more thanmanual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- your earned income from that trade or business.ing, learning, or working.
You cannot deduct payments for medical
insurance for any month in which you were eligi- IntroductionImpairment-related expenses defined. Im- ble to participate in a health plan subsidized by This chapter discusses which taxes you canpairment-related expenses are those ordinary your employer, your spouse's employer, or, ef- deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule Aand necessary business expenses that are: fective March 30, 2010, an employer of your (Form 1040). It also explains which taxes youdependent or your child under age 27 at the end• Necessary for you to do your work satis- can deduct on other schedules or forms andof 2010. You cannot deduct payments for afactorily, which taxes you cannot deduct.qualified long-term care insurance contract for This chapter covers the following topics.• For goods and services not required or any month in which you were eligible to partici-used, other than incidentally, in your per- pate in a long-term care insurance plan subsi- • Income taxes (federal, state, local, andsonal activities, and dized by your employer or your spouse's foreign).
employer.• Not specifically covered under other in- • Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-come tax laws. If you qualify to take the deduction, use the eign).Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
• Personal property taxes (state and local).Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-Where to report. If you are self-employed, ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of the • Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.deduct the business expenses on the appropri- following applies, do not use that worksheet.ate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to
Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine whichreport your business income and expenses. • You had more than one source of income
taxes you can deduct.subject to self-employment tax.If you are an employee, complete Form
The end of the chapter contains a section2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form • You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In- that explains which forms you use to deduct2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned different types of taxes.Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040), Income Exclusion.line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106,
Business taxes. You can deduct certain• You are using amounts paid for qualifiedline 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to
taxes only if they are ordinary and necessarylong-term care insurance to figure the de-your impairment. Enter the amount that is unre-
expenses of your trade or business or of produc-duction.lated to your impairment on Schedule A (Form
ing income. For information on these taxes, see1040), line 21. Your impairment-related work If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form Publication 535, Business Expenses.expenses are not subject to the 1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies tion 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de- State or local taxes. These are taxes im-to other employee business expenses. duction. posed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or
any of their political subdivisions (such as aExample. You are blind. You must use a county or city), or by the District of Columbia.reader to do your work. You use the reader both Note. When figuring the amount you can
during your regular working hours at your place deduct for insurance premiums, do not include Indian tribal government. An Indian tribal
of work and outside your regular working hours any advance payments shown in box 1 of Form government recognized by the Secretary of the
away from your place of work. The reader's 1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Treasury as performing substantial government
services are only for your work. You can deduct Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming the functions will be treated as a state for purposes
your expenses for the reader as business ex- health coverage tax credit, subtract the amount of claiming a deduction for taxes. Income taxes,
penses. shown on Form 8885, line 4, from the total insur- real estate taxes, and personal property taxes
ance premiums you paid. imposed by that Indian tribal government (or by
any of its subdivisions that are treated as politi-Also, do not include amounts paid for health
cal subdivisions of a state) are deductible.insurance coverage with retirement plan distri-
butions that were tax-free because you are aHealth Insurance Costs Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by aretired public safety officer.
foreign country or any of its political subdivi-for Self-Employed sions.Where to report. You take this deduction on
Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc-Persons
Useful Itemstions and do not claim 100% of your
self-employed health insurance on line 29, in-If you were self-employed and had a net profit You may want to see:
clude any remaining premiums with all otherfor the year, you may be able to deduct, as an
medical care expenses on Schedule A (Formadjustment to income, amounts paid for medical Publication
1040), subject to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 6 ofand qualified long-term care insurance on behalf ❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for IndividualsPublication 535, Business Expenses, for moreof yourself, your spouse, your dependents, and,
information.effective March 30, 2010, your children who ❏ 530 Tax Information for Homeowners
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 145

Page 148 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions) benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-What To Deduct
lowing state benefit funds are deductible as❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti- state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),Deductions mated tax payments, or other tax payments as line 5.
follows.❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental • Alaska Unemployment CompensationIncome and Loss Fund.Withheld taxes. You can deduct state and
❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit local income taxes withheld from your salary in • California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-the year they are withheld. For 2010, these efit Fund.taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your
• New Jersey Nonoccupational DisabilityForm W-2. You may also have state or local
Benefit Fund.income tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14),
Tests To Deduct Form 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-R • New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-
(boxes 10 and 13). tion Fund.Any Tax
• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-
efit Fund.The following two tests must be met for you to timated tax payments you made during the year
deduct any tax. to a state or local government. However, you • Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-must have a reasonable basis for making the tion Fund.• The tax must be imposed on you. estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or
• Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefit• You must pay the tax during your tax year. local tax payments that are not made in good
Fund.faith at the time of payment are not deductible.
For example, you made an estimated state in- • Washington State Supplemental Work-The tax must be imposed on you. Generally, come tax payment. However, the estimate of men's Compensation Fund.you can deduct only taxes imposed on you. your state tax liability shows that you will get aGenerally, you can deduct property taxes refund of the full amount of your estimated pay-only if you are an owner of the property. If your Employee contributions to private orment. You had no reasonable basis to believespouse owns the property and pays the real voluntary disability plans are not de-you had any additional liability for state incomeestate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your ductible.taxes and you cannot deduct the estimated tax
CAUTION
!spouse's separate return or on your joint return. payment.
You must pay the tax during your tax year. Refund (or credit) of state or local incomeRefund applied to taxes. You can deduct any
If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)part of a refund of prior-year state or local in-
only those taxes you actually paid during your state or local income taxes in a year after thecome taxes that you chose to have credited to
tax year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day year in which you paid them, you may have toyour 2010 estimated state or local income taxes.
you mail or deliver the check is the date of include the refund in income on Form 1040, line Do not reduce your deduction by either of
payment, provided the check is honored by the 10, in the year you receive it. This includesthe following items.
financial institution. If you use a pay-by-phone refunds resulting from taxes that were• Any state or local income tax refund (oraccount (such as a credit card or electronic overwithheld, applied from a prior year return,credit) you expect to receive for 2010.funds withdrawal), the date reported on the not figured correctly, or figured again because of
statement of the financial institution showing an amended return. If you did not itemize your• Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year
when payment was made is the date of pay- deductions in the previous year, do not includestate and local income taxes you actually
ment. If you contest a tax liability and are a cash the refund in income. If you deducted the taxesreceived in 2010.
basis taxpayer, you can deduct the tax only in in the previous year, include all or part of the
the year you actually pay it (or transfer money or refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youHowever, part or all of this refund (or credit)
other property to provide for satisfaction of the receive the refund. For a discussion of howmay be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state
contested liability). See Publication 538, Ac- much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.or local income taxes, later.
counting Periods and Methods, for details.
Separate federal returns. If you and yourIf you use an accrual method of accounting, Foreign Income Taxesspouse file separate state, local, and federalsee Publication 538 for more information. income tax returns, you each can deduct on your Generally, you can take either a deduction or afederal return only the amount of your own state credit for income taxes imposed on you by aand local income tax that you paid during the tax foreign country or a U.S. possession. However,year. you cannot take a deduction or credit for foreignIncome Taxes income taxes paid on income that is exemptJoint state and local returns. If you and
from U.S. tax under the foreign earned incomeyour spouse file joint state and local returns andThis section discusses the deductibility of state exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. Forseparate federal returns, each of you can deductand local income taxes (including employee information on these exclusions, see Publicationon your separate federal return a part of the totalcontributions to state benefit funds) and foreign 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Residentstate and local income taxes paid during the taxincome taxes. Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign taxyear. You can deduct only the amount of the
credit, see Publication 514.total taxes that is proportionate to your gross
State and Local Income income compared to the combined gross in-
come of you and your spouse. However, youTaxes
cannot deduct more than the amount you actu-
ally paid during the year. You can avoid thisYou can deduct state and local income taxes. Real Estate Taxescalculation if you and your spouse are jointly and
individually liable for the full amount of the stateException.  You cannot deduct state and local Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,and local income taxes. If so, you and yourincome taxes you pay on income that is exempt or foreign taxes on real property levied for thespouse can deduct on your separate federalfrom federal income tax, unless the exempt in- general public welfare. You can deduct thesereturns the amount you each actually paid.come is interest income. For example, you can- taxes only if they are based on the assessednot deduct the part of a state's income tax that is value of the real property and charged uniformlyJoint federal return. If you file a joint federalon a cost-of-living allowance exempt from fed- against all property under the jurisdiction of thereturn, you can deduct the total of the state anderal income tax. taxing authority.local income taxes both of you paid.
At the time this publication went to Deductible real estate taxes generally do not
print, Congress was considering legis- Contributions to state benefit funds. As an include taxes charged for local benefits and im-
lation that would extend the deduction employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu- provements that increase the value of the prop-
CAUTION
!
for state and local general sales taxes through tions to state benefit funds withheld from your erty. They also do not include itemized charges
2010. If enacted, this legislation could impact wages that provide protection against loss of for services (such as trash collection) assessed
the deduction of state and local income taxes. wages. For example, certain states require em- against specific property or certain people, even
To find out if this legislation was enacted, and for ployees to make contributions to state funds if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For
more details, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs. providing disability or unemployment insurance more information about taxes and charges that
Page 146 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 149 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
New Motor Vehicle State or local sales or excise taxes you paid for the State or local sales or excise taxes you paid on a
Taxes purchase of any new motor vehicle purchased after vehicle purchased after December 31, 2009.
February 16, 2009, and before January 1, 2010,
including certain fees charged to purchase new
motor vehicles in states that do not have a sales
tax.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary disability
Employee contributions to state funds listed under plans.
Contributions to state benefit funds.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that are
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty income. not expenses of your trade or business or of
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28. producing income.
One-half of self-employment tax paid. Per capita taxes.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that are not expenses of your trade or
Taxes business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Foreign real estate taxes, if you take the standard
Foreign real estate taxes. deduction and the real property is not used in your
Tenant's share of real estate taxes paid by trade or business or does not produce rental income.
cooperative housing corporation.
Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on
someone else (see Division of real estate taxes
between buyers and sellers).
Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real
Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See
Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
are not deductible, see Real Estate-Related personally liable for the tax, you are considered Real estate taxes for prior years. Do not
Items You Cannot Deduct, later. divide delinquent taxes between the buyer andto have paid your part of the tax at the time of the
seller if the taxes are for any real property taxsale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax toTenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous- year before the one in which the property is sold.the date of sale even though you did not actuallying corporation. Generally, if you are a ten- Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquentpay it. However, you must also include theant-stockholder in a cooperative housing taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyeramount of that tax in the selling price of thecorporation, you can deduct the amount paid to
must add them to the cost of the property. Theproperty. The buyer must include the samethe corporation that represents your share of the
seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer.amount in his or her cost of the property.real estate taxes the corporation paid or incurred
However, the seller must include them in thefor your dwelling unit. The corporation should You figure your deduction for taxes on each selling price.provide you with a statement showing your property bought or sold during the real propertyshare of the taxes. For more information, see Examples. The following examples illus-tax year as follows.Special Rules for Cooperatives in Publication trate how real estate taxes are divided between530. Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your buyer and seller.
Real Estate Tax DeductionDivision of real estate taxes between buyers Keep for Your Records
 Example 1. Dennis and Beth White's realand sellers. If you bought or sold real estate
property tax year for both their old home andduring the year, the real estate taxes must be 1. Enter the total real estate taxes fordivided between the buyer and the seller. their new home is the calendar year, with pay-the real property tax year .... .The buyer and the seller must divide the real ment due August 1. The tax on their old home,2. Enter the number of days in theestate taxes according to the number of days in sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newreal property tax year that youthe real property tax year (the period to which home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis andowned the property ........ .the tax is imposed relates) that each owned the Beth are considered to have paid a proportion-property. The seller is treated as paying the 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap ate share of the real estate taxes on the oldtaxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . . home even though they did not actually payThe buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isning with the date of sale. This applies regard- your deduction. Enter it on they can claim only a proportionate share of theless of the lien dates under local law. Generally, Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 taxes they paid on their new property eventhis information is included on the settlement though they paid the entire amount.Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property youstatement provided at the closing. bought or sold during the real property tax year. Your Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until total deduction is the sum of the line 4 amounts for all ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-they are paid because you use the cash method of the properties.
of accounting, and the buyer of your property is ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). They
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 147

Page 150 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estatefigure their deduction for taxes on their old home Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund
Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on New Homeas follows. or rebate in 2010 of real estate taxes you paid in
2010, you must reduce your deduction by the1. Enter the total real estate taxes forWorksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate amount refunded to you. If you received a refundthe real property tax year .... . $752Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on Old Home or rebate in 2010 of real estate taxes you de-
2. Enter the number of days in the ducted in an earlier year (either as an itemized1. Enter the total real estate taxes for real property tax year that you deduction or an increase to your standard de-the real property tax year .... . $620 owned the property ........ . 243 duction), you generally must include the refund2. Enter the number of days in the 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap or rebate in income in the year you receive it.real property tax year that you years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .6658 However, the amount you include in income isowned the property ........ . 126 limited to the amount of the deduction that re-4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap duced your tax in the earlier year. For moreyour deduction. Claim it onyears, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .3452 Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $501 information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is The remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de-your deduction. Enter it on duction) of taxes paid in 2011, along with the Real Estate-Related ItemsSchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $214 $680 paid in 2010, is added to the cost of their
You Cannot Deductnew home.Since the buyers of their old home paid all of the Because the taxes up to the date of sale aretaxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 in Payments for the following items generally areconsidered paid by the seller on the date of sale,the selling price of the old home. (The buyers not deductible as real estate taxes.the seller is entitled to a 2010 tax deduction ofadd the $214 to their cost of the home.) $931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2009 and • Taxes for local benefits.Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur- the $251 for the 123 days the seller owned theing the real property tax year for 243 days (May • Itemized charges for services (such ashome in 2010. The seller must also include the3 to December 31, including their date of trash and garbage pickup fees).$931 in the selling price when he or she figurespurchase). They figure their deduction for taxes the gain or loss on the sale. The seller should • Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).on their new home as follows. contact the Browns in January 2011 to find out • Rent increases due to higher real estatehow much real estate tax is due for 2010.Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate taxes.Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on New Home Form 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- • Homeowners' association charges.changes of real estate, the person responsible1. Enter the total real estate taxes for for closing the sale (generally the settlementthe real property tax year .... . $732 agent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real es-
Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor-2. Enter the number of days in the tate taxes generally do not include taxesreal property tax year that you mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- charged for local benefits and improvementsowned the property ........ . 243 erty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds tending to increase the value of your property.from the sale and should include the portion of3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap These include assessments for streets, side-the seller's real estate tax liability that the buyeryears, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .6658 walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parkingwill pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes facilities, and similar improvements. You should4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is these taxes in the cost basis of the property, and increase the basis of your property by theyour deduction. Enter it on the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paidSchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $487 amount of the assessment.and includes it in the sales price of the property.
Local benefit taxes are deductible only if theyFor a real estate transaction that involves aSince Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on
are for maintenance, repair, or interest chargeshome, any real estate tax the seller paid inthe new home, they add $245 ($732 paid less
related to those benefits. If only a part of theadvance but that is the liability of the buyer$487 deduction) to their cost of the new home.
taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, youappears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer(The sellers add this $245 to their selling price
deducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the must be able to show the amount of that part toand deduct the $245 as a real estate tax.)
seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc-Dennis and Beth's real estate tax deduction claim the deduction. If you cannot determine
tion (or includes it in income) by the samefor their old and new homes is the sum of $214 what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or
amount. See Refund (or rebate), later.and $487, or $701. They will enter this amount interest, none of it is deductible.
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6. Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly Taxes for local benefits may be in-
mortgage payment includes an amount placed cluded in your real estate tax bill. If yourExample 2. George and Helen Brown in escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real taxing authority (or mortgage lender)
CAUTION
!bought a new home on May 3, 2010. Their real estate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the does not furnish you a copy of your real estateproperty tax year for the new home is the calen- total amount placed in escrow. You can deduct tax bill, ask for it. You should use the rules abovedar year. Real estate taxes for 2009 were as- only the real estate tax that the third party actu- to determine if the local benefit tax is deductible.sessed in their state on January 1, 2010. The ally paid to the taxing authority. If the third party Contact the taxing authority if you need addi-taxes became due on May 31, 2010, and Octo- does not notify you of the amount of real estate tional information about a specific charge onber 31, 2010. tax that was paid for you, contact the third party your real estate tax bill.The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after or the taxing authority to find the proper amountthe date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2009 to show on your return.were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2010, Itemized charges for services.  An itemized
and $340 on October 31, 2010. These taxes Tenants by the entirety. If you and your charge for services assessed against specificwere for the 2009 real property tax year. The spouse held property as tenants by the entirety property or certain people is not a tax, even if theBrowns cannot deduct them since they did not and you file separate federal returns, each of charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam-own the property until 2010. Instead, they must you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid ple, you cannot deduct the charge as a realadd $680 to the cost of their new home. on the property. estate tax if it is:In January 2011, the Browns receive their
Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa- • A unit fee for the delivery of a service2010 property tax statement for $752, which
ration agreement states that you must pay thethey will pay in 2011. The Browns owned their (such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000
real estate taxes for a home owned by you andnew home during the 2010 real property tax year gallons of water you use),your spouse, part of your payments may befor 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They will • A periodic charge for a residential servicedeductible as alimony and part as real estatefigure their 2011 deduction for taxes as follows. (such as a $20 per month or $240 annualtaxes. See Taxes and insurance  in chapter 18
fee charged to each homeowner for trashfor more information.
collection), orMinisters' and military housing allowances.
• A flat fee charged for a single service pro-If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
vided by your government (such as a $30formed services and receive a housing allow-
charge for mowing your lawn because itance that you can exclude from income, you still
was allowed to grow higher than permittedcan deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay on
under your local ordinance).your home.
Page 148 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 151 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must look at your real estate tax this purpose, the purchase price is the cost of Any amount you deduct for new motor vehi-
bill to determine if any nondeductible the new motor vehicle, not including any state or cle taxes, either as an itemized deduction or as
itemized charges, such as those listed local sales or excise taxes. If the purchase price an increase to your standard deduction, is not
CAUTION
!
above, are included in the bill. If your taxing (before taxes) of your new motor vehicle is included in the cost of the motor vehicle for
authority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish $49,500 or less, the amount of state or local purposes of figuring any deduction for deprecia-
you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. sales or excise taxes you paid on the purchase tion (in the case of business property) or figuring
is not limited based on vehicle price. However, if gain or loss when you sell or otherwise disposeException. Service charges used to main- the purchase price (before taxes) exceeds of the motor vehicle. In the earlier Example, thetain or improve services (such as trash collec- $49,500, the amount of taxes you can deduct is cost of the new light truck is $60,932. This is thetion or police and fire protection) are deductible limited to the portion of the total taxes you paid amount of the purchase price before taxesas real estate taxes if: that are attributable to the first $49,500 of the ($60,000) plus the amount of sales taxes you
purchase price. paid that you did not deduct ($3,650 ± $2,718 =• The fees or charges are imposed at a like
$932).To figure the amount of taxes you paid on therate against all property in the taxing juris-
first $49,500 of the purchase price, you will needdiction,
to know the rate(s) of tax that apply in the state• The funds collected are not earmarked; and locality where you purchased each newinstead, they are commingled with general motor vehicle. Some states and localities im- Personal Propertyrevenue funds, and pose a fixed rate, while others may provide rates
that are limited to a certain dollar amount per• Funds used to maintain or improve serv- Taxespurchase. See the Example, later.ices are not limited to or determined by the
amount of these fees or charges collected. Personal property tax is deductible if it is a stateIncome limit. The income limit for the deduc- or local tax that is:tion for new motor vehicle taxes is based onTransfer taxes (or stamp taxes). Transfer • Charged on personal property,modified adjusted gross income (AGI). If yourtaxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale modified AGI is $135,000 or more ($260,000 or • Based only on the value of the personalof a personal home are not deductible. If they more if your filing status is married filing jointly) property, andare paid by the seller, they are expenses of the you cannot deduct new motor vehicle taxes. Usesale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. • Charged on a yearly basis, even if it isthe following table to see if the income limit willIf paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost collected more or less than once a year.affect your deduction.basis of the property.
IF your modified AGI THEN the income A tax that meets the above requirements canRent increase due to higher real estate taxes. is... limit... be considered charged on personal propertyIf your landlord increases your rent in the form of even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. Fora tax surcharge because of increased real es- $125,000 or less will not affect your example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiestate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as ($250,000 or less if deduction as a personal property tax even if it is called ataxes. married filing jointly) registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-
$125,001 to $134,999 will reduce yourHomeowners' association charges. These tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-
($250,001 to $259,999 if deductioncharges are not deductible because they are ways.married filing jointly)imposed by the homeowners' association, If the tax is partly based on value and partly
rather than the state or local government. based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.$135,000 or more will eliminate your
($260,000 or more if deduction
Example. Your state charges a yearly mo-married filing jointly)
tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50
cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 basedNew Motor Vehicle Modified AGI. To figure your modified AGI, on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of
add back the following items to your adjusted your car. You can deduct $15 (1% ×  $1,500) asTaxes gross income (Form 1040, line 38, or Form a personal property tax because it is based on
1040A, line 22). the value. The remaining $17 ($.50 ×  34), basedYou can deduct state or local sales or excise
on the weight, is not deductible.taxes you paid for the purchase of any motor • The foreign earned income exclusion.
vehicle(s) after February 16, 2009, and before • The foreign housing exclusion and deduc-January 1, 2010, if you are the original user of tion.the vehicle (in other words, the vehicle is ªnewº).
A motor vehicle is any passenger automobile, • The exclusions for income earned by bona Taxes and Feeslight truck, or motorcycle with a gross vehicle fide residents of American Samoa and
weight rating that is not more than 8,500 Puerto Rico. You Cannot Deductpounds, or a motor home.
If you purchase a new motor vehicle in a Many federal, state, and local government taxesExample. You purchased a new light truck onstate that does not have a sales tax, you can are not deductible because they do not fall withinMay 3, 2009, for $60,000 before taxes. The totaldeduct certain fees charged to buyers of new the categories discussed earlier. Other taxesamount of state and local sales taxes you paidmotor vehicles if the fee charged is similar to a and fees, such as federal income taxes, are notwere $3,650. The state where you purchasedsales tax. The states that do not have a sales tax deductible because the tax law specifically pro-the vehicle imposed a fixed general sales taxare Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Montana, New hibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1.rate of 6% (.06), and the county charged anHampshire, and Oregon. Taxes and fees that are generally not de-additional discretionary sales tax of 1/2% (.005)The deduction for new motor vehicle taxes is ductible include the following items.on the first $10,000 of the purchase price. Thesubject to a limit based on vehicle price and an amount of sales tax you can deduct is limited toincome limit. If both of these limits apply, you • Employment taxes. This includes social$3,020. This is the total of the state sales tax offigure the amount of your deduction by applying security, Medicare, and railroad retirement$2,970, which is subject to the limit based onthe income limit after you figure the amount of taxes withheld from your pay. However,vehicle price ($49,500 x .06), plus the countyyour deduction subject to the limit based on one-half of self-employment tax you pay issales tax of $50 ($10,000 x .005). Because yourvehicle price. These limits also apply to certain deductible. In addition, the social securityfiling status is single and your modified AGI isfees charged to buyers of new motor vehicles in and other employment taxes you pay on$126,000, the income limit also applies. Youstates that do not have a sales tax. If you itemize the wages of a household worker may beenter $3,020 on line 3 of the worksheet on pagedeductions, figure these limits using the work- included in medical expenses that you can2 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You complete thesheet on page 2 of Schedule A (Form 1040). deduct or child care expenses that allowrest of the worksheet and determine that theComplete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) if you to claim the child and dependent careamount you can deduct is further reduced byyou take the standard deduction. credit. For more information, see chapters$302 (on line 10 of the worksheet) as a result of 21 and 32. Limit based on vehicle price. Your deduc- the income limit. The amount you can deduct for
• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-tion is limited to the state or local sales or excise new motor vehicle taxes is $2,718 ($3,020 ±
sion taxes. However, you can deduct thetaxes you paid on the first $49,500 of the $302). You enter $2,718 on line 11 of the work-
estate tax attributable to income in respectpurchase price of each new motor vehicle. For sheet and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7.
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 149

Page 152 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary, vehicle taxes on a vehicle purchased after Feb- • You file Form 1040 and itemize deduc-
must include that income in your gross ruary 16, 2009, and before January 1, 2010, tions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
income. In that case, deduct the estate tax complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040).
• The mortgage is a secured debt on a qual-as a miscellaneous deduction that is not Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half of ified home in which you have an owner-subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross- your self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27. ship interest. (Generally, your mortgage isincome limit. For more information, see
Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and a secured debt if you put your home up asOther taxes. All other deductible taxes areAdministrators. collateral to protect the interest of thededucted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.
lender. The term ªqualified homeº means• Federal income taxes. This includes in-
your main home or second home. For de-come taxes withheld from your pay.
tails, see Publication 936.)• Fines and penalties. You cannot deduct
fines and penalties paid to a government
for violation of any law, including related Both you and the lender must intend that the
amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. loan be repaid.
23.• Gift taxes. 
Amount Deductible• License fees. You cannot deduct license
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-
In most cases, you can deduct all of your homeriage, driver's, and dog license fees). Interest
mortgage interest. How much you can deduct• Per capita taxes. You cannot deduct depends on the date of the mortgage, thestate or local per capita taxes. Expense amount of the mortgage, and how you use the
• State and local sales taxes. You cannot mortgage proceeds.
deduct state and local general sales taxes
Fully deductible interest. If all of your mort-(other than certain new motor vehicle
What's New gages fit into one or more of the following threetaxes discussed earlier).
categories at all times during the year, you can
deduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (IfLimit on itemized deductions expired. ForAt the time this publication went to any one mortgage fits into more than one cate-2010, your itemized deductions are no longerprint, Congress was considering legis-
gory, add the debt that fits in each category tolimited because of your adjusted gross income.lation that would extend the deduction
CAUTION
!
your other debt in the same category.)for state and local general sales taxes through
The three categories are as follows:2010. To find out if this legislation was enacted,
and for more details, go to www.irs.gov/form-
1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-spubs. Introduction ber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).Many taxes and fees other than those listed
above are also nondeductible, unless they are This chapter discusses what interest expenses 2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,
ordinary and necessary expenses of a business you can deduct. Interest is the amount you pay 1987, to buy, build, or improve your homeor income producing activity. For other nonde- for the use of borrowed money. (called home acquisition debt), but only ifductible items, see Real Estate-Related Items The following are types of interest you can throughout 2010 these mortgages plus anyYou Cannot Deduct, earlier. deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A grandfathered debt totaled $1 million or
(Form 1040). less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-
arately).• Home mortgage interest, including certain
points and mortgage insurance premiums. 3. Mortgages you took out after October 13,Where To Deduct
1987, other than to buy, build, or improve• Investment interest.You deduct taxes on the following schedules. your home (called home equity debt), but
This chapter explains these deductions. It also only if throughout 2010 these mortgagesState and local income taxes.  These taxes explains where to deduct other types of interest totaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifare deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5, and lists some types of interest you cannot de- married filing separately) and totaled noeven if your only source of income is from busi-
duct. more than the fair market value of yourness, rents, or royalties.
home reduced by (1) and (2).Use Table 23-1 to find out where to get moreForeign income taxes. Generally, income
information on various types of interest, includ-taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos- The dollar limits for the second and third catego-
session can be claimed as an itemized deduc- ing investment interest. ries apply to the combined mortgages on your
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as a main home and second home.credit against your U.S. income tax on Form See Part II of Publication 936 for more de-Useful Items1040, line 47. To claim the credit, you may have tailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-You may want to see:to complete and attach Form 1116. For more sition, and home equity debt.information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in- You can use Figure 23-A to check whetherPublicationstructions, or Publication 514. your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest DeductionReal estate taxes and personal property
Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deducttaxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched- ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses interest on a mortgage that does not fit into anyule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 8, respectively,
unless they are paid on property used in your of the three categories listed above. If this ap-
business, in which case they are deducted on plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 to
Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Schedule F figure the amount of interest you can deduct.
(Form 1040). Taxes on property that produces Home Mortgagerent or royalty income are deducted on Sched-
ule E (Form 1040). Special SituationsInterestNew motor vehicle taxes. These taxes are
This section describes certain items that can bededucted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7. To Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-figure the amount to enter on line 7, complete included as home mortgage interest and othersest you pay on a loan secured by your homethe worksheet on page 2 of Schedule A (Form that cannot. It also describes certain special(main home or a second home). The loan may1040). situations that may affect your deduction.be a mortgage to buy your home, a secondIf you do not itemize deductions on Schedule
mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. Late payment charge on mortgage payment.A (Form 1040), these taxes can increase your
You can deduct home mortgage interest if all You can deduct as home mortgage interest astandard deduction. To figure the amount of
your standard deduction, if you paid new motor the following conditions are met. late payment charge if it was not for a specific
Page 150 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 153 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here:
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before October 13, 1987?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
October 13, 1987 used to buy, build, or improve
the main home secured by that main home
mortgage or used to buy, build, or improve the
second home secured by that second home
mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 151

Page 154 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
service performed in connection with your mort- Nonredeemable ground rents. Payments General Rule
gage loan. on a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-
You generally cannot deduct the full amount ofgage interest. You can deduct them as rent ifMortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay off points in the year paid. Because they are pre-they are a business expense or if they are foryour home mortgage early, you may have to pay paid interest, you generally deduct them ratablyrental property.a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc-
mortgage interest provided the penalty is not for tion Allowed Ratably, next.Reverse mortgages. A reverse mortgage is aa specific service performed or cost incurred in loan where the lender pays you (in a lump sum, For exceptions to the general rule, see De-connection with your mortgage loan. a monthly advance, a line of credit, or a combi- duction Allowed in Year Paid, later.
nation of all three) while you continue to live inSale of home. If you sell your home, you can
your home. With a reverse mortgage, you retaindeduct your home mortgage interest (subject to
Deduction Allowed Ratablyany limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ- title to your home. Depending on the plan, your
ing, the date of sale. reverse mortgage becomes due with interest
If you do not meet the tests listed under Deduc-when you move, sell your home, reach the end
tion Allowed in Year Paid, later, the loan is not aExample. John and Peggy Harris sold their of a pre-selected loan period, or die. Because home improvement loan, or you choose not tohome on May 7. Through April 30, they made reverse mortgages are considered loan ad- deduct your points in full in the year paid, youhome mortgage interest payments of $1,220. vances and not income, the amount you receive can deduct the points ratably (equally) over theThe settlement sheet for the sale of the home is not taxable. Any interest (including original life of the loan if you meet all the following tests.showed $50 interest for the 6-day period in May issue discount) accrued on a reverse mortgage
up to, but not including, the date of sale. Their is not deductible until the loan is paid in full. Your 1. You use the cash method of accounting.mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 + deduction may be limited because a reverse This means you report income in the year$50). mortgage loan generally is subject to the limit on you receive it and deduct expenses in the
Home Equity Debt discussed in Publication 936. year you pay them. Most individuals usePrepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad-
this method.vance for a period that goes beyond the end of
Rental payments. If you live in a house beforethe tax year, you must spread this interest over 2. Your loan is secured by a home. (Thefinal settlement on the purchase, any paymentsthe tax years to which it applies. You can deduct home does not need to be your mainyou make for that period are rent and not inter-in each year only the interest that qualifies as home.)est. This is true even if the settlement papers callhome mortgage interest for that year. However,
3. Your loan period is not more than 30them interest. You cannot deduct these pay-there is an exception that applies to points, dis-
years.ments as home mortgage interest.cussed later.
4. If your loan period is more than 10 years,Mortgage interest credit. You may be able to Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt the terms of your loan are the same asclaim a mortgage interest credit if you were securities. You cannot deduct the home mort- other loans offered in your area for theissued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a gage interest on grandfathered debt or home same or longer period.state or local government. Figure the credit on equity debt if you used the proceeds of theForm 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 ormortgage to buy securities or certificates thatthis credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter- less, or the number of points is not moreproduce tax-free income. ªGrandfathered debtºest deduction by the amount of the credit. than:and ªhome equity debtº are defined earlier underFor more information on the credit, see chap- Amount Deductible. a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less,ter 37.
or
Ministers' and military housing allowance. Refunds of interest. If you receive a refund of b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15If you are a minister or a member of the uni- interest in the same tax year you paid it, you years.formed services and receive a housing allow- must reduce your interest expense by the
ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund
home mortgage interest. of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you
generally must include the refund in income in Deduction Allowed in Year PaidMortgage assistance payments. If you qual- the year you receive it. However, you need toify for mortgage assistance payments for include it only up to the amount of the deduction You can fully deduct points in the year paid if youlower-income families under section 235 of the that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is meet all the following tests. (You can use FigureNational Housing Act, part or all of the interest true whether the interest overcharge was re- 23-B as a quick guide to see whether your pointson your mortgage may be paid for you. You funded to you or was used to reduce the out- are fully deductible in the year paid.) cannot deduct the interest that is paid for you.
standing principal on your mortgage.
No other effect on taxes. Do not include 1. Your loan is secured by your main home.If you received a refund of interest you over-these mortgage assistance payments in your (Your main home is the one you ordinarilypaid in an earlier year, you generally will receiveincome. Also, do not use these payments to live in most of the time.)a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement,reduce other deductions, such as real estate showing the refund in box 3. For information 2. Paying points is an established businesstaxes. about Form 1098, see Form 1098, Mortgage practice in the area where the loan was
Interest Statement, later. made.Divorced or separated individuals. If a di-
For more information on how to treat refundsvorce or separation agreement requires you or 3. The points paid were not more than the
of interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov-your spouse or former spouse to pay home points generally charged in that area.
mortgage interest on a home owned by both of eries in chapter 12.
4. You use the cash method of accounting.you, the payment of interest may be alimony.
This means you report income in the yearSee the discussion of Payments for Points you receive it and deduct expenses in thejointly-owned home in chapter 18.
year you pay them. (If you want more infor-The term ªpointsº is used to describe certainRedeemable ground rents. If you make an- mation about this method, see Accountingcharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrowernual or periodic rental payments on a redeem- Methods in chapter 1.)to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also beable ground rent, you can deduct them as
called loan origination fees, maximum loanmortgage interest. 5. The points were not paid in place of
charges, loan discount, or discount points.Payments made to end the lease and to buy amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-
A borrower is treated as paying any pointsthe lessor's entire interest in the land are not rately on the settlement statement, such as
that a home seller pays for the borrower's mort-deductible as mortgage interest. For more infor- appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees,
gage. See Points paid by the seller, later.mation, see Publication 936. attorney fees, and property taxes.
Page 152 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 155 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. The funds you provided at or before clos- deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of Example 1. When you took out a $100,000
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were at the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷  180 mortgage loan to buy your home in December,
least as much as the points charged. The months) ×  6 payments] of the points in 2010. you were charged one point ($1,000). You meet
funds you provided do not have to have The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services all the tests for deducting points in the year paid,
been applied to the points. They can in- and is not deductible. except the only funds you provided were a $750
clude a down payment, an escrow deposit, down payment. Of the $1,000 charged for
Example 2. The facts are the same as inearnest money, and other funds you paid points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.
Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of theat or before closing for any purpose. You You spread the remaining $250 over the life of
loan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000cannot have borrowed these funds from the mortgage.
to repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%your lender or mortgage broker.
($25,000 ÷  $100,000) of the points ($2,000) in Example 2. The facts are the same as in7. You use your loan to buy or build your 2010. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 ×  25%). Example 1, except that the person who sold youmain home. Bill also deducts the ratable part of the re- your home also paid one point ($1,000) to help
8. The points were computed as a percent- maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you can
age of the principal amount of the mort- spread over the life of the loan. This is $50 deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were
gage. [($1,500 ÷  180 months) ×  6 payments] in 2010. charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). You
The total amount Bill deducts in 2010 is $550 spread the remaining $250 over the life of the9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle- ($500 + $50). mortgage. You must reduce the basis of yourment statement (such as the Settlement home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.Statement, Form HUD-1) as points
charged for the mortgage. The points may Excess points. If you meet all the tests inSpecial Situationsbe shown as paid from either your funds or Deduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, except
the seller's. that the points paid were more than generallyThis section describes certain special situations
paid in your area (test (3)), you deduct in thethat may affect your deduction of points.
year paid only the points that are generallyNote. If you meet all of these tests, you can charged. You must spread any additional pointsOriginal issue discount. If you do not qualifychoose to either fully deduct the points in the over the life of the mortgage.to either deduct the points in the year paid oryear paid, or deduct them over the life of the deduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or ifloan. Mortgage ending early. If you spread youryou choose not to use either of these methods, deduction for points over the life of the mort-the points reduce the issue price of the loan.Home improvement loan. You can also fully gage, you can deduct any remaining balance inThis reduction results in original issue discount,deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan to the year the mortgage ends. However, if youwhich is discussed in chapter 4 of Publicationimprove your main home, if tests (1) through (6) refinance the mortgage with the same lender,535.are met. you cannot deduct any remaining balance of
spread points. Instead, deduct the remainingSecond home.  You cannot fully de- Amounts charged for services. Amounts
balance over the term of the new loan.duct in the year paid points you pay on charged by the lender for specific services con-
A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-loans secured by your second home. nected to the loan are not interest. Examples of
CAUTION
!
ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.You can deduct these points only over the life of these charges are:
the loan.
• Appraisal fees, Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1999
Refinancing. Generally, points you pay to that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of• Notary fees, and
refinance a mortgage are not deductible in full in the mortgage. He deducts $200 points per year.
• Preparation costs for the mortgage note orthe year you pay them. This is true even if the Through 2009, Dan has deducted $2,200 of the
deed of trust.new mortgage is secured by your main home. points.
However, if you use part of the refinanced Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2010. HeYou cannot deduct these amounts as points
mortgage proceeds to improve your main home can deduct the remaining $800 of points in 2010.either in the year paid or over the life of the
and you meet the first 6 tests listed under De- mortgage. Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deductduction Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, you can points paid on a mortgage unless the mortgagefully deduct the part of the points related to the Points paid by the seller. The term ªpointsº fits into one of the categories listed earlier underimprovement in the year you paid them with your includes loan placement fees that the seller Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 forown funds. You can deduct the rest of the points pays to the lender to arrange financing for the details.over the life of the loan. buyer.
Treatment by seller. The seller cannot de-Example 1. In 1996, Bill Fields got a mort- Mortgage Insuranceduct these fees as interest. But they are a sellinggage to buy a home. In 2010, Bill refinanced that Premiumsexpense that reduces the amount realized bymortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage
the seller. See chapter 15  for information onloan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To You can treat amounts you paid during 2010 forselling your home.get the new loan, he had to pay three points qualified mortgage insurance as home mort-($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaid Treatment by buyer. The buyer reduces gage interest. The insurance must be in connec-interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged for the basis of the home by the amount of the tion with home acquisition debt and theservices, in place of amounts that ordinarily are seller-paid points and treats the points as if he or insurance contract must have been issued afterstated separately on the settlement statement. she had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- 2006.Bill paid the points out of his private funds, rather tion Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, are met, the
than out of the proceeds of the new loan. The Qualified mortgage insurance. Qualifiedbuyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If
payment of points is an established practice in mortgage insurance is mortgage insurance pro-any of those tests are not met, the buyer deducts
the area, and the points charged are not more vided by the Department of Veterans Affairs, thethe points over the life of the loan.
than the amount generally charged there. Bill's Federal Housing Administration, or the RuralFor information about basis, see chapter 13.
first payment on the new loan was due July 1. Housing Service, and private mortgage insur-
He made six payments on the loan in 2010 and Funds provided are less than points. If you ance (as defined in section 2 of the Homeown-
is a cash basis taxpayer. meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Year ers Protection Act of 1998 as in effect on
Bill used the funds from the new mortgage to Paid, earlier, except that the funds you provided December 20, 2006).
repay his existing mortgage. Although the new were less than the points charged to you (test Mortgage insurance provided by the Depart-
mortgage loan was for Bill's continued owner- (6)), you can deduct the points in the year paid, ment of Veterans Affairs is commonly known as
ship of his main home, it was not for the up to the amount of funds you provided. In addi- a funding fee. If provided by the Rural Housing
purchase or improvement of that home. He can- tion, you can deduct any points paid by the Service, it is commonly known as a guarantee
not deduct all of the points in 2010. He can seller. fee. These fees can be deducted fully in 2010 if
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 153

Page 156 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here:
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, earnest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your main home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 154 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 157 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the mortgage insurance contract was issued in home during the year, it also will show the de- Allocation of Interest2010. Contact the mortgage insurance issuer to ductible points paid during the year, including
Expensedetermine the deductible amount if it is not re- seller-paid points. However, it should not show
ported in box 4 of Form 1098. any interest that was paid for you by a govern-
If you borrow money for business or personalment agency.
purposes as well as for investment, you mustSpecial rules for prepaid mortgage insur- As a general rule, Form 1098 will include allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyance. Generally, if you paid premiums for only points that you can fully deduct in the year
the interest expense on the part of the debt usedqualified mortgage insurance that are allocable paid. However, certain points not included on
for investment purposes is treated as invest-to periods after the close of the tax year, such Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in the
ment interest. The allocation is not affected bypremiums are treated as paid in the period to year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points,
the use of property that secures the debt.which they are allocated. You must allocate the earlier, to determine whether you can deduct
premiums over the shorter of the stated term of points not shown on Form 1098.
the mortgage or 84 months, beginning with the Limit on Deductionmonth the insurance was obtained. No deduc- Prepaid interest on Form 1098. If you pre-
tion is allowed for the unamortized balance if the paid interest in 2010 that accrued in full by Janu- Generally, your deduction for investment inter-
mortgage is satisfied before its term. This para- ary 15, 2011, this prepaid interest may be est expense is limited to the amount of your net
graph does not apply to qualified mortgage in- included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you investment income.
surance provided by the Department of cannot deduct the prepaid amount for January You can carry over the amount of investmentVeterans Affairs or the Rural Housing Service. 2011 in 2010. (See Prepaid interest , earlier.) interest that you could not deduct because ofSee the Example below. You will have to figure the interest that accrued this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedfor 2011 and subtract it from the amount in box over is treated as investment interest paid orExample. Ryan purchased a home in May 1. You will include the interest for January 2011 accrued in that next year.of 2009 and financed the home with a 15-year with the other interest you pay for 2011. See You can carry over disallowed investmentmortgage. Ryan also prepaid all of the $9,240 in How To Report, later. interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanprivate mortgage insurance required at the time
your taxable income in the year the interest wasof closing in May. Since the $9,240 in private Refunded interest. If you received a refund of paid or accrued.mortgage insurance is allocable to periods after mortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier
2009, Ryan must allocate the $9,240 over the year, you generally will receive a Form 1098
shorter of the life of the mortgage or 84 months. showing the refund in box 3. See Refunds of
Net Investment IncomeRyan's adjusted gross income (AGI) for 2009 is interest, earlier.
$76,000. Ryan can deduct $880 ($9,240 ÷  84 × Determine the amount of your net investment8 months) for qualified mortgage insurance pre- Mortgage insurance premiums. The amount income by subtracting your investment ex-miums in 2009. For 2010, Ryan can deduct of mortgage insurance premiums you paid dur- penses (other than interest expense) from your$1,320 ($9,240 ÷  84 ×  12 months) if his AGI is ing 2010 may be shown in box 4 of Form 1098. investment income.$100,000 or less. See Mortgage Insurance Premiums, earlier.
In this example, the mortgage insurance pre- Investment income. This generally includesmiums are allocated over 84 months, which is your gross income from property held for invest-shorter than the life of the mortgage of 15 years ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and(180 months). Investment Interest royalties). Investment income does not include
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also doesLimit on deduction. If your adjusted gross This section discusses interest expenses you not include qualified dividends or net capital gainincome on Form 1040, line 38, is more than may be able to deduct as an investor. unless you choose to include them.$100,000 ($50,000 if your filing status is married If you borrow money to buy property you holdfiling separately), the amount of your mortgage Choosing to include qualified dividends.for investment, the interest you pay is invest-insurance premiums that are otherwise deducti- Investment income generally does not includement interest. You can deduct investment inter-ble is reduced and may be eliminated. See Line qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 8.est subject to the limit discussed later. However,13 in the instructions for Schedule A (Form However, you can choose to include all or part ofyou cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-1040) and complete the Qualified Mortgage In- your qualified dividends in investment income.duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deductsurance Premiums Deduction Worksheet to fig- You make this choice by completing Forminterest expenses on straddles.ure the amount you can deduct. If your adjusted 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.Investment interest does not include anygross income is more than $109,000 ($54,500 if If you choose to include any amount of yourqualified home mortgage interest or any interestmarried filing separately), you cannot deduct qualified dividends in investment income, youtaken into account in computing income or lossyour mortgage insurance premiums. must reduce your qualified dividends that arefrom a passive activity.
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by
Form 1098, Mortgage the same amount.Investment PropertyInterest Statement Choosing to include net capital gain. In-
vestment income generally does not include netProperty held for investment includes propertyIf you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest that produces interest, dividends, annuities, or capital gain from disposing of investment prop-(including certain points and mortgage insur- royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-ance premiums) during the year on any one trade or business. It also includes property that tual funds). However, you can choose to includemortgage, you generally will receive a Form produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi- all or part of your net capital gain in investment1098 or a similar statement from the mortgage nary course of a trade or business) from the sale income.holder. You will receive the statement if you pay or trade of property producing these types of You make this choice by completing Forminterest to a person (including a financial institu- income or held for investment (other than an 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in the interest in a passive activity). Investment prop- If you choose to include any amount of yourcourse of that person's trade or business. A erty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- net capital gain in investment income, you mustgovernmental unit is a person for purposes of ness activity in which you did not materially reduce your net capital gain that is eligible forfurnishing the statement. participate (other than a passive activity). the lower capital gains tax rates by the sameThe statement for each year should be sent amount.to you by January 31 of the following year. A Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS. Before making either choice, considerTo determine your investment interest, combine
the overall effect on your tax liability.The statement will show the total interest you your share of investment interest from a partner-
Compare your tax if you make one orpaid during the year, any mortgage insurance ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
TIP
both of these choices with your tax if you do not.premiums you paid, and if you purchased a main other investment interest.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 155

Page 158 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment income of child reported on par- Table 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense
ent's return. Investment income includes the
part of your child's interest and dividend income AND for more
that you choose to report on your return. If the IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ...
child does not have qualified dividends, Alaska
deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33, or Publication 970.Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri- Form 1040A, line 18butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter- deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
points reported on Form 1098 line 10est and Dividends.
Child's qualified dividends. If part of the deductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
reported on Form 1098 line 11amount you report is your child's qualified divi-
dends, that part (which is reported on Form deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in- 1098 line 12
vestment income. However, you can choose to
deductible mortgage insurance Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.include all or part of it in investment income, as premiums line 13explained under Choosing to include qualified
dividends, earlier. deductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550.
than incurred to produce rents or line 14Your investment income also includes the royalties)amount on Form 8814, line 12, (or, if applicable,
the reduced amount figured next under Child's deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Publication 535.
1040)Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535.
If part of the amount you report is your child's deductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part rents or royaltiesdoes not count as investment income. To figure
personal interest not deductible.the amount of your child's income that you can
consider your investment income, start with the
amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
• Loan fees. Form 4952amount by a percentage that is equal to the
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by • Credit investigation fees. Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expensethe total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest- • Interest to purchase or carry tax-exemptthe result from the amount on Form 8814, line ment interest. securities. 12.
Child's capital gain distributions. If part Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not Penalties. You cannot deduct fines and pen-of the amount you report is your child's capital have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your alties paid to a government for violations of law,
return if you meet all of the following tests.gain distributions, that part (which is reported on regardless of their nature.
Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13) • Your investment interest expense is notgenerally does not count as investment income. more than your investment income from Personal InterestHowever, you can choose to include all or part of interest and ordinary dividends minus any
it in investment income, as explained in Choos- qualified dividends. Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-
ing to include net capital gain, earlier. terest is any interest that is not home mortgage• You do not have any other deductible in- interest, investment interest, business interest,Your investment income also includes the vestment expenses. or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,
• You have no carryover of investment inter- lowing items.the reduced amount figured under Child's est expense from 2009.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). • Interest on car loans (unless you use the
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all car for business).
of your investment interest.Investment expenses. Investment expenses • Interest on federal, state, or local income
are your allowed deductions (other than interest tax. More Informationexpense) directly connected with the production • Finance charges on credit cards, retail in-of investment income. Investment expenses For more information on investment interest, stallment contracts, and revolving chargethat are included as a miscellaneous itemized see Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Publica- accounts incurred for personal expenses. deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), are al- tion 550.
• Late payment charges by a public utility. lowable deductions after applying the 2% limit
that applies to miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions. Use the smaller of: You may be able to deduct interest you
pay on a qualified student loan. For• The investment expenses included on Items You details, see  Publication 970, Tax Ben-
TIPSchedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or efits for Education.Cannot Deduct• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.
Some interest payments are not deductible.
Certain expenses similar to interest also are notLosses from passive activities. Income or
deductible. Nondeductible expenses include theexpenses that you used in computing income or Allocation of Interest
following items.loss from a passive activity are not included in
determining your investment income or invest- If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than• Personal interest (discussed later). 
one purpose (for example, personal and busi-ment expenses (including investment interest
• Service charges (however, see Other Ex- ness), you must allocate the interest on the loanexpense). See Publication 925, Passive Activity penses in chapter 28). and At-Risk Rules, for information about passive
activities. • Annual fees for credit cards. 
Page 156 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 159 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to each use. However, you do not have to allo- the Form 1098 you received, deduct only your
cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti- share of the interest on Schedule A (Form
Introductionble, regardless of how the funds are used. 1040), line 10. You should let each of the other
borrowers know what his or her share is. This chapter explains how to claim a deductionYou allocate interest (other than fully deduct-
for your charitable contributions. It discusses theible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the Mortgage proceeds used for business or
same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do following topics.investment. If your home mortgage interest
this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro- deduction is limited, but all or part of the mort- • Organizations that are qualified to receiveceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do gage proceeds were used for business, invest- deductible charitable contributions.this, see chapter 4 of Publication 535. ment, or other deductible activities, see Table
• The types of contributions you can deduct.23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of your
excess interest that is for those activities. • How much you can deduct.
• What records to keep.Investment interest. Deduct investment in-How To Report
terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub- • How to report your charitable contribu-
You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line tions.
mortgage interest expense on your tax return. 14.
Where you deduct your interest expense gener- A charitable contribution is a donation or gift
ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds. to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It isAmortization of bond premium. There areSee Table 23-1 for a summary of where to de- voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-various ways to treat the premium you pay toduct your interest expense. ing to get, anything of equal value.buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-
zation in Publication 550.
Home mortgage interest and points. Deduct Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitable
the home mortgage interest and points reported Income-producing rental or royalty interest. contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form Deduct interest on a loan for income-producing ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter- rental or royalty property that is not used in your your deduction may be limited if certain rulesest to the financial institution than the amount business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). and limits explained in this chapter apply to you.shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-
ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex- Example. You rent out part of your home Useful Itemsplaining the difference and print ªSee attachedº and borrow money to make repairs. You can
next to line 10. deduct only the interest payment for the rented You may want to see:
part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deduct Deduct home mortgage interest that was not
the rest of the interest payment on Schedule A Publicationreported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgage(Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage ❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizationsinterest.interest to the person from whom you bought
❏ 526 Charitable Contributionsyour home, show that person's name, address,
and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on the ❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donateddotted lines next to line 11. The seller must give Propertyyou this number and you must give the seller
your TIN. A Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer Form (and Instructions)Identification Number and Certification, can be
used for this purpose. Failure to meet any of ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized24.
these requirements may result in a $50 penalty Deductions
for each failure. The TIN can be either a social ❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributionssecurity number, an individual taxpayer identifi-
Contributionscation number (issued by the Internal Revenue
Service), or an employer identification number.
See Social Security Number  in chapter 1 for
more information about TINs. What's New Organizations ThatIf you can take a deduction for points that
were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct Haiti relief. If you made a cash contribution Qualify To Receivethose points on Schedule A (Form 1040), line after January 11, 2010, and before March 1,12. 2010, for the relief of the victims of the January DeductibleDeduct mortgage insurance premiums on 12, 2010, earthquake in Haiti, and you deducted
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 13. that contribution on your 2009 return, you can- Contributionsnot deduct it on your 2010 return.More than one borrower. If you and at
You can deduct your contributions only if youleast one other person (other than your spouse if Expired provisions. The following provisions
you file a joint return) were liable for and paid make them to a qualified organization. To be-have expired and will not apply for 2010.
interest on a mortgage that was for your home, come a qualified organization, most organiza-
• Special rules for qualified charitable distri-and the other person received a Form 1098 tions other than churches and governments, asbutions from IRAs.showing the interest that was paid during the described below, must apply to the IRS. 
year, attach a statement to your return explain- • The special deduction limit for qualified You can ask any organization whethering this. Show how much of the interest each of conservation contributions. it is a qualified organization, and mostyou paid, and give the name and address of the
will be able to tell you. Or you can• Special rules for donations of food inven-
TIPperson who received the form. Deduct your
check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-tory.share of the interest on Schedule A (Form
fied organizations. You may find Publication 781040), line 11, and print ªSee attachedº next to
in your local library's reference section. Or youthe line. Also, deduct your share of any qualified At the time this publication went to
can find it on the Internet at mortgage insurance premiums on Schedule A print, Congress was considering legis-
(Form 1040), line 13. www.irs.gov/app/pub-78. You can also call thelation that would reinstate these ex-
CAUTION
!
IRS at 1-877-829-5500 to find out if an organiza-Similarly, if you are the payer of record on a pired tax benefits. To find out if this legislation
tion is qualified. (For TTY/TDD help, callmortgage on which there are other borrowers was enacted, and for more details, go to www.
1-800-829-4059).entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on irs.gov/formspubs.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 157

Page 160 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Utility company emergency energy pro-Table 24-1. Examples of Charitable ContributionsÐA Quick Check
grams, if the utility company is an agent
for a charitable organization that assistsUse the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See the
individuals with emergency energy needs. rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies. Deductible As Not Deductible
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions • Public parks and recreation facilities.
Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to: • Civil defense organizations. 
• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs,
mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of Certain foreign charitable organizations.  organizations commerce Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel,
• Federal, state, and local governments, if • Foreign organizations (except certain and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu-
your contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) charitable organizations. Generally, you must
the public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profit have income from sources in that country. For
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals additional information on the deduction of contri-• Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
• Public parks and recreation facilities butions to Canadian charities, see Publicationlaw changes
597, Information on the United States ±Canada• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, • Homeowners' associations
Income Tax Treaty. If you need more informa-Goodwill Industries, United Way, Boy • Individuals tion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi-Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls • Political groups or candidates for can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526.Clubs of America, etc. public office
• War veterans groups • Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
• Charitable organizations listed in • Dues, fees, or bills paid to countryPublication 78 clubs, lodges, fraternal orders, or
• Expenses paid for a student living with Contributionssimilar groups
you, sponsored by a qualified • Tuitionorganization You Can Deduct• Value of your time or services• Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve • Value of blood given to a blood bank Generally, you can deduct your contributions ofa qualified organization as a volunteer
money or property that you make to, or for the
use of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri-
bution is ªfor the use ofº a qualified organizationTypes of Qualified 4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies or when it is held in a legally enforceable trust forcorporations. the qualified organization or in a similar legalOrganizations  Note. Your contribution to this type of arrangement. The contributions must be madeorganization is not deductible if it can beGenerally, only the five following types of organi- to a qualified organization and not set aside forused for the care of a specific lot or mauso-zations can be qualified organizations. use by a specific person.leum crypt. If you give property to a qualified organiza-1. A community chest, corporation, trust, 5. The United States or any state, the District tion, you generally can deduct the fair marketfund, or foundation organized or created in of Columbia, a U.S. possession (including value of the property at the time of the contribu-or under the laws of the United States, any Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of a tion. See Contributions of Property, later in thisstate, the District of Columbia, or any pos- state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribal chapter.session of the United States (including government or any of its subdivisions that Your deduction for charitable contributions isPuerto Rico). It must be organized and op- perform substantial government functions. generally limited to 50% of your adjusted grosserated only for one or more of the following Note. To be deductible, your contribution income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limitspurposes. to this type of organization must be made may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later.
solely for public purposes. a. Religious. Table 24-1 lists some examples of contribu-
tions you can deduct and some that you cannotb. Charitable. Examples.   The following list gives some ex- deduct.
c. Educational. amples of qualified organizations.
d. Scientific. Contributions From• Churches, a convention or association of
churches, temples, synagogues,e. Literary. Which You Benefitmosques, and other religious organiza-
f. The prevention of cruelty to children or tions. If you receive a benefit as a result of making aanimals. contribution to a qualified organization, you can• Most nonprofit charitable organizations
deduct only the amount of your contribution thatCertain organizations that foster national such as the Red Cross and the United
is more than the value of the benefit you receive.or international amateur sports competition Way. 
Also, see Contributions From Which You Benefitalso qualify. • Most nonprofit educational organizations, under Contributions You Cannot Deduct, later.2. War veterans' organizations, including including the Boy (and Girl) Scouts of If you pay more than fair market value to aposts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or- America, colleges, museums, and daycare qualified organization for merchandise, goods,ganized in the United States or any of its centers if substantially all the child care or services, the amount you pay that is morepossessions. provided is to enable individuals (the par- than the value of the item can be a charitableents) to be gainfully employed and the3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, and contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,services are available to the general pub-associations operating under the lodge sys- you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-lic. However, if your contribution is a sub-tem. ble contribution.stitute for tuition or other enrollment fee, itNote. Your contribution to this type of is not deductible as a charitable contribu-organization is deductible only if it is to be Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to ation, as explained later under Contribu-used solely for charitable, religious, scien- dinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds oftions You Cannot Deduct. tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the function go to the church. The ticket to the
the prevention of cruelty to children or ani- • Nonprofit hospitals and medical research dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.
mals. organizations. When you buy your ticket, you know that its
Page 158 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 161 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24-2. Volunteers' Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $10 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $60 a week for my time? 
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don't want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse's aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
value is less than your payment. To figure the If there is an established charge for the c. Preferred access to goods or services,
event, that charge is the value of your benefit. Ifamount of your charitable contribution, you sub- and
there is no established charge, your contributiontract the value of the benefit you receive ($25) d. Discounts on the purchase of goodsis that part of your payment that is more than thefrom your total payment ($65). You can deduct and services.reasonable value of the right to attend the event.$40 as a contribution to the church.
Whether you use the tickets or other privileges 2. Admission, while you are a member, tohas no effect on the amount you can deduct.Example 2. At a fund-raising auction con- events that are open only to members ofHowever, if you return the ticket to the qualifiedducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week's
the organization, if the organization rea-organization for resale, you can deduct the en-stay at a beach house. The amount you pay is
sonably projects that the cost per persontire amount you paid for the ticket.no more than the fair rental value. You have not
(excluding any allocated overhead) is notmade a deductible charitable contribution. Even if the ticket or other evidence of more than $9.60.payment indicates that the payment is
Athletic events. If you make a payment to, or a ªcontribution,º this does not mean
CAUTION
!
for the benefit of, a college or university and, as you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket Token items. You can deduct your entire pay-a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to an shows the price of admission and the amount of ment to a qualified organization as a charitableathletic event in the athletic stadium of the col- the contribution, you can deduct the contribution contribution if both of the following are true.lege or university, you can deduct 80% of the amount.
payment as a charitable contribution. • You get a small item or other benefit of
If any part of your payment is for tickets token value.Example. You pay $40 to see a special(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part is showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualified • The qualified organization correctly deter-not deductible. In that case, subtract the price of organization. Printed on the ticket is ªContribu- mines that the value of the item or benefitthe tickets from your payment. 80% of the re- tionÐ$40.º If the regular price for the movie is you received is not substantial and informsmaining amount is a charitable contribution. $8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 you that you can deduct your payment inregular price).Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem- full.
bership in an athletic scholarship program main- Membership fees or dues. You may be abletained by a university (a qualified organization). to deduct membership fees or dues you pay to a Written statement. A qualified organizationThe only benefit of membership is that you have qualified organization. However, you can deduct must give you a written statement if you make athe right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a only the amount that is more than the value of payment to it that is more than $75 and is partlydesignated area of the stadium at the univer- the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct a contribution and partly for goods or services.sity's home football games. You can deduct dues, fees, or assessments paid to country The statement must tell you that you can deduct$240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contribution. clubs and other social organizations. They are only the amount of your payment that is morenot qualified organizations. than the value of the goods or services youExample 2. The facts are the same as in Certain membership benefits can be disre- received. It must also give you a good faithExample 1 except that your $300 payment in- garded. Both you and the organization can estimate of the value of those goods or services.cluded the purchase of one season ticket for the disregard certain membership benefits you get The organization can give you the statementstated ticket price of $120. You must subtract in return for an annual payment of $75 or less to either when it solicits or when it receives thethe usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300 the qualified organization. The benefits that can
payment from you.payment. The result is $180. Your deductible be disregarded are:
charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180). Exception. An organization will not have to1. Any rights or privileges, other than those give you this statement if one of the following isdiscussed under Athletic events, earlier,Charity benefit events. If you pay a qualified true.that you can use frequently while you are aorganization more than fair market value for the
member, such as:right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show, 1. The organization is:
sporting event, or other benefit event, you can a. Free or discounted admission to the or- a. The type of organization described indeduct only the amount that is more than the ganization's facilities or events, (5) under  Types of Qualified Organiza-value of the privileges or other benefits you
receive. tions, earlier, orb. Free or discounted parking,
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 159

Page 162 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Formed only for religious purposes, and from home overnight in connection with the con- The deduction for travel expenses will not be
the only benefit you receive is an intan- vention. However, see Travel, later. denied simply because you enjoy providing
gible religious benefit (such as admis- You cannot deduct personal expenses for services to the charitable organization. Even if
sion to a religious ceremony) that sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable
generally is not sold in commercial nightclubs. You also cannot deduct transporta- contribution deduction for your travel expensestransactions outside the donative con- tion, meals and lodging, and other expenses for if you are on duty in a genuine and substantialtext. your spouse or children. sense throughout the trip. However, if you have You cannot deduct your expenses in attend- only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of2. You receive only items whose value is not ing a church convention if you go only as a the trip you do not have any duties, you cannotsubstantial as described under Token member of your church rather than as a chosen
deduct your travel expenses.items, earlier. representative. You can deduct unreimbursed
expenses that are directly connected with giving3. You receive only membership benefits that Example 1. You are a troop leader for aservices for your church during the convention.can be disregarded, as described earlier. tax-exempt youth group and you help take the
Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up- group on a camping trip. You are responsible for
keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every- overseeing the setup of the camp and for provid-Expenses Paid for Student day use and that you must wear while ing adult supervision for other activities during
performing donated services for a charitable or-Living With You the entire trip. You participate in the activities ofganization. the group and really enjoy your time with them.You may be able to deduct some expenses of You oversee the breaking of camp and you helpFoster parents. You may be able to deduct ashaving a student live with you. You can deduct transport the group home. You can deduct youra charitable contribution some of the costs ofqualifying expenses for a foreign or American
travel expenses.being a foster parent (foster care provider) if youstudent who:
have no profit motive in providing the foster care
Example 2. You sail from one island to an-1. Lives in your home under a written agree- and are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualified
ment between you and a qualified organi- other and spend 8 hours a day counting whalesorganization must designate the individuals you
zation as part of a program of the and other forms of marine life. The project istake into your home for foster care.
organization to provide educational oppor- You can deduct expenses that meet both of sponsored by a charitable organization. In most
tunities for the student, the following requirements. circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex-
penses.2. Is not your relative or dependent, and 1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-
penses to feed, clothe, and care for the3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or any Example 3. You work for several hoursfoster child.lower grade at a school in the United each morning on an archaeological dig spon-States. 2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali- sored by a charitable organization. The rest of
fied organization. the day is free for recreation and sightseeing.You can deduct up to $50 a month for
You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-each full calendar month the student
tion even though you work very hard duringduct as charitable contributions may be consid-lives with you. Any month when condi-
TIP
ered support provided by you in determining those few hours.tions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 days
whether you can claim the foster child as aor more counts as a full month.
dependent. For details, see chapter 3. Example 4. You spend the entire day at-For additional information, see Expenses
tending a charitable organization's regionalPaid for Student Living With You in Publication Example.  You cared for a foster child be- meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-526. cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit the ning you go to the theater. You can claim your
agency that placed her in your home. Your un-Mutual exchange program. You cannot de- travel expenses as charitable contributions, butreimbursed expenses are not deductible asduct the costs of a foreign student living in your you cannot claim the cost of your evening at thecharitable contributions.home under a mutual exchange program theater.through which your child will live with a family in
Car expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed Daily allowance (per diem). If you providea foreign country.
out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas services for a charitable organization and re-
and oil, that are directly related to the use of your ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonableOut-of-Pocket Expenses in car in giving services to a charitable organiza- travel expenses, including meals and lodgingtion. You cannot deduct general repair andGiving Services while away from home overnight, you must in-maintenance expenses, depreciation, registra- clude in income the amount of the allowancetion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance.Although you cannot deduct the value of your that is more than your deductible travel ex-  If you do not want to deduct your actualservices given to a qualified organization, you penses. You can deduct your necessary travelexpenses, you can use a standard mileage ratemay be able to deduct some amounts you pay in
expenses that are more than the allowance.of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.giving services to a qualified organization. The
You can deduct parking fees and tollsamounts must be: Deductible travel expenses. These in-whether you use your actual expenses or the clude:• Unreimbursed, standard mileage rate.
• Air, rail, and bus transportation,You must keep reliable written records of• Directly connected with the services,
your car expenses. For more information, see • Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,• Expenses you had only because of the Car expenses under Records To Keep, later.services you gave, and • Taxi fares or other costs of transportation
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable between the airport or station and your• Not personal, living, or family expenses.
contribution deduction for travel expenses nec- hotel,
essarily incurred while you are away from homeTable 24-2 , earlier, contains questions and • Lodging costs, andperforming services for a charitable organizationanswers that apply to some individuals who vol-
only if there is no significant element of personal • The cost of meals.unteer their services.
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel.
Because these travel expenses are not busi-Conventions. If you are a chosen representa- This applies whether you pay the expenses di-
ness-related, they are not subject to the sametive attending a convention of a qualified organi- rectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses
limits as business-related expenses. For infor-zation, you can deduct unreimbursed expenses indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
mation on business travel expenses, see Travelfor travel and transportation, including a reason- ble organization and the organization pays for
able amount for meals and lodging, while away your travel expenses. Expenses in chapter 26.
Page 160 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 163 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. The bar has private, as well as public, deduct any fixed amount you may be re-
purposes, such as promoting the pro- quired to pay in addition to the tuition feeContributions fessional interests of members, and to enroll in a private school, even if it is
designated as a ªdonation.º c. Your contribution is unrestricted andYou Cannot Deduct
can be used for private purposes.
There are some contributions you cannot de- Value of Time or Services2. Chambers of commerce and other busi-duct, such as those made to specific individuals
ness leagues or organizations (but seeand those made to nonqualified organizations. You cannot deduct the value of your time orchapter 28).(See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu- services, including:
tions to Nonqualified Organizations , next.) 3. Civic leagues and associations. • Blood donations to the Red Cross or toThere are others you can deduct only part of, as blood banks, anddiscussed later under Contributions From Which 4. Communist organizations.
• The value of income lost while you workYou Benefit.
5. Country clubs and other social clubs. as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-
ganization. 6. Foreign organizations other than:Contributions to
Individuals a. A U.S. organization that transfers funds
Personal Expensesto a charitable foreign organization if
You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi- the U.S. organization controls the use You cannot deduct personal, living, or familyviduals, including the following. of the funds or if the foreign organiza- expenses, such as the following items.tion is only an administrative arm of the• Contributions to fraternal societies made
U.S. organization, or • The cost of meals you eat while you per-for the purpose of paying medical or burial
form services for a qualified organizationexpenses of deceased members. b. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican unless it is necessary for you to be awaycharitable organizations. See Certain• Contributions to individuals who are needy from home overnight while performing theforeign charitable organizations underor worthy. This includes contributions to a services.Organizations That Qualify To Receivequalified organization if you indicate that Deductible Contributions, earlier. • Adoption expenses, including fees paid toyour contribution is for a specific person.
an adoption agency and the costs of keep-But you can deduct a contribution that you ing a child in your home before adoption is7. Homeowners' associations.give to a qualified organization that in turn final (but see Adoption Credit in chapterhelps needy or worthy individuals if you do 8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28). 37, and the instructions for Form 8839,not indicate that your contribution is for a Qualified Adoption Expenses). You also9. Political organizations and candidates.specific person. may be able to claim an exemption for theExample. You can deduct contributions child. See Adopted child in chapter 3. 
for flood relief, hurricane relief, or other
Contributions Fromdisaster relief to a qualified organization.
However, you cannot deduct contributions Appraisal FeesWhich You Benefit
earmarked for relief of a particular individ-
Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofual or family. If you receive or expect to receive a financial or
donated property are not deductible as contribu-economic benefit as a result of making a contri-• Payments to a member of the clergy that tions (but see chapter 28).bution to a qualified organization, you cannotcan be spent as he or she wishes, such as deduct the part of the contribution that repre-for personal expenses. sents the value of the benefit you receive. See
• Expenses you paid for another person who Contributions From Which You Benefit  under
Contributions You Can Deduct , earlier. Theseprovided services to a qualified organiza- Contributionscontributions include the following.tion.
Example. Your son does missionary work. of Property• Contributions for lobbying. This includes
You pay his expenses. You cannot claim a amounts that you earmark for use in, or in
deduction for your son's unreimbursed ex- If you contribute property to a qualified organiza-connection with, influencing specific legis-
penses related to his contribution of serv- tion, the amount of your charitable contributionlation. 
ices. is generally the fair market value of the property• Contributions to a retirement home that at the time of the contribution. However, if the• Payments to a hospital that are for a spe- are clearly for room, board, maintenance, property has increased in value, you may havecific patient's care or for services for a or admittance. Also, if the amount of your to make some adjustments to the amount ofspecific patient. You cannot deduct these contribution depends on the type or size of your deduction. See Giving Property That Haspayments even if the hospital is operated apartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- Increased in Value, later.by a city, a state, or other qualified organi- table contribution. For information about the records you mustzation. • Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You keep and the information you must furnish with
cannot deduct as a charitable contribution your return if you donate property, see Records
amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery To Keep and How To Report, later.Contributions to tickets or to play bingo or other games of
Nonqualified chance. For information on how to report Clothing and household items. You cannot
gambling winnings and losses, see chap- take a deduction for clothing or household itemsOrganizations ters 12 and 28. you donate unless the clothing or household
items are in good used condition or better.You cannot deduct contributions to organiza- • Dues to fraternal orders and similar
tions that are not qualified to receive groups. However, see Membership fees or Exception. You can take a deduction for a
tax-deductible contributions, including the fol- dues, earlier, under Contributions You contribution of an item of clothing or household
lowing. Can Deduct. item that is not in good used condition or better if
you deduct more than $500 for it and include a• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui-1. Certain state bar associations if: qualified appraisal of it with your return.tion, even if you pay them for children to
a. The state bar is not a political subdivi- attend parochial schools or qualifying non- Household items. Household items in-
sion of a state, profit day-care centers. You also cannot clude:
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 161

Page 164 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Furniture and furnishings, • File the return on time without claiming the acknowledging your donation. The statement
deduction for the qualified vehicle. After must contain the information and meet the tests• Electronics, receiving the Form 1098-C, file an for an acknowledgment described under Deduc-
• Appliances, amended return, Form 1040X, claiming tions of At Least $250 But Not More Than $500
the deduction. Attach Copy B of Form under Records To Keep, later.• Linens, and 1098-C (or other statement) to the
Partial interest in property. Generally, you• Other similar items. amended return. For more information
cannot deduct a charitable contribution of lessabout amended returns, see chapter 1.
than your entire interest in property.Household items do not include:
Right to use property. A contribution of the• Food, Exceptions. There are two exceptions to the
right to use property is a contribution of less thanrules just described for deductions of more than• Paintings, antiques, and other objects of your entire interest in that property and is not$500.art, deductible. For exceptions and more informa-Exception 1Ðvehicle used or improved by tion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in Trust• Jewelry and gems, and organization. If the qualified organization in Publication 561.• Collections. makes a significant intervening use of or mate-
rial improvement to the vehicle before transfer- Future interests in tangible personal prop-ring it, and you claim a deduction of more than erty. You may be able to deduct the value of aCars, boats, and airplanes. The following $500, you generally can deduct the vehicle's fair charitable contribution of a future interest in tan-rules apply to any donation of a qualified vehicle. market value at the time of the contribution. But gible personal property only after all interveningA qualified vehicle is: if the vehicle's fair market value was more than interests in and rights to the actual possessionyour cost or other basis, you may have to reduce• A car or any motor vehicle manufactured or enjoyment of the property have either expiredthe fair market value to get the deductiblemainly for use on public streets, roads, or been turned over to someone other than your-amount, as described under Giving Propertyand highways, self, a related person, or a related organization.That Has Increased in Value , later. The Form
• A boat, or Tangible personal property. This is any1098-C (or other statement) will show whether
property, other than land or buildings, that canthis exception applies.• An airplane. be seen or touched. It includes furniture, books,Exception 2 Ðvehicle given or sold to jewelry, paintings, and cars.Deduction more than $500. If you donate a needy individual. If the qualified organization
qualified vehicle to a qualified organization and Future interest. This is any interest that iswill give the vehicle, or sell it for a price well
you claim a deduction of more than $500, you to begin at some future time, regardless ofbelow fair market value, to a needy individual to
can deduct the smaller of: whether it is designated as a future interestfurther the organization's charitable purpose,
under state law.and you claim a deduction of more than $500,• The gross proceeds from the sale of the
you generally can deduct the vehicle's fair mar-vehicle by the organization, or
ket value at the time of the contribution. But if the Determining• The vehicle's fair market value on the date vehicle's fair market value was more than your
of the contribution. If the vehicle's fair mar- Fair Market Valuecost or other basis, you may have to reduce the
ket value was more than your cost or other fair market value to get the deductible amount, This section discusses general guidelines forbasis, you may have to reduce the fair as described under Giving Property That Has determining the fair market value of variousmarket value to figure the deductible Increased in Value, later. The Form 1098-C (or types of donated property. Publication 561 con-amount, as described under Giving Prop- other statement) will show whether this excep- tains a more complete discussion.erty That Has Increased in Value, later. tion applies.
Fair market value is the price at which prop-This exception does not apply if the organi- erty would change hands between a willingForm 1098-C. You must attach to your re- zation sells the vehicle at auction. In that case, buyer and a willing seller, neither having to buyturn Copy B of the Form 1098-C, Contributions you cannot deduct the vehicle's fair market or sell, and both having reasonable knowledgeof Motor Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or value. of all the relevant facts.other statement containing the same informa-
tion as Form 1098-C) you received from the Example. Anita donates a used car to a Used clothing and household items. Gener-organization. The Form 1098-C (or other state- qualified organization. She bought it 3 years ago ally, the fair market value of used clothing andment) will show the gross proceeds from the for $9,000. A used car guide shows the fair household goods is far less than its original cost.sale of the vehicle. market value for this type of car is $6,000. How- For used clothing, you should claim as theever, Anita gets a Form 1098-C from the organi-If you e-file your return, you must (a) attach value the price that buyers of used items actuallyzation showing the car was sold for $2,900.Copy B of Form 1098-C to Form 8453 and mail pay in used clothing stores, such as consign-Neither exception 1 nor exception 2 applies. Ifthe forms to the IRS, or (b) include Copy B of ment or thrift shops. See Household Goods inAnita itemizes her deductions, she can deductForm 1098-C as a pdf attachment if your Publication 561 for information on the valuation$2,900 for her donation. She must attach Formsoftware program allows it. of household goods, such as furniture, appli-1098-C and Form 8283 to her return.If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other ances, and linens.
statement), you cannot deduct your contribu- Deduction $500 or less. If the qualified or-
tion. You must get Form 1098-C (or other state- ganization sells the vehicle for $500 or less and Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to a
ment) within 30 days of the sale of the vehicle. exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply, you can deduct thrift store operated by her church. She paid
But if exception 1 or 2 (described next) applies, the smaller of: $300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats in
you must get Form 1098-C (or other statement) the thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value• $500, orwithin 30 days of your donation. of the coat is reasonably determined to be $50.
• The vehicle's fair market value on the date Dawn's donation is limited to $50.Filing deadline approaching and still no of the contribution. But if the vehicle's fairForm 1098-C. If the filing deadline is ap- Cars, boats, and airplanes. If you contributemarket value was more than your cost orproaching and you still do not have a Form a car, boat, or airplane to a charitable organiza-other basis, you may have to reduce the1098-C, you have two choices. tion, you must determine its fair market value. fair market value to get the deductible
• Request an automatic 6-month extension Certain commercial firms and trade organiza-amount, as described under Giving Prop-
of time to file your return. You can get this tions publish used car pricing guides, commonlyerty That Has Increased in Value, later.
extension by filing Form 4868, Application called ªblue books,º containing complete dealer
for Automatic Extension of Time to File If the vehicle's fair market value is at least sale prices or dealer average prices for recent
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For $250 but not more than $500, you must have a model years. The guides may be published
more information, see chapter 1. written statement from the qualified organization monthly or seasonally and for different regions
Page 162 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 165 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the country. These guides also provide esti- short-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your Option.  If you grant an option to buy real
property at a bargain price to a charitable organi-mates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu- deduction is limited to $800 (fair market value
zation, you cannot take a deduction until thesual mileage, and physical condition. The prices minus the appreciation).
organization exercises the option.are not ªofficialº and these publications are not
Capital gain property. Property is capitalconsidered an appraisal of any specific donated Borrowed funds. If you make a contribu-gain property if its sale at fair market value onproperty. But they do provide clues for making tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct thethe date of the contribution would have resultedan appraisal and suggest relative prices for contribution in the year you make it, regardlessin long-term capital gain. It includes capital as-comparison with current sales and offerings in of when you repay the loan.sets held more than 1 year, as well as certainyour area.
real property and depreciable property used in
your trade or business and, generally, held moreExample. You donate a used car in poor
than 1 year.condition to a local high school for use by stu-
Limits on Deductionsdents studying car repair. A used car guide Amount of deduction Ð general rule.shows the dealer retail value for this type of car When figuring your deduction for a gift of capital If your total contributions for the year are 20% orin poor condition is $1,600. However, the guide gain property, you generally can use the fair less of your adjusted gross income, you do notshows the price for a private party sale of the car market value of the gift. need to read this section. The limits discussed inis only $750. The fair market value of the car is
this section do not apply to you.Exceptions. In certain situations, you mustconsidered to be $750.
The amount of your deduction for charitablereduce the fair market value by any amount that
contributions is limited to 50% of your adjustedwould have been long-term capital gain if youLarge quantities. If you contribute a large
gross income and may be limited to 30% or 20%had sold the property for its fair market value.number of the same item, fair market value is the
of your adjusted gross income, depending onGenerally, this means reducing the fair marketprice at which comparable numbers of the item
the type of property you give and the type ofvalue to the property's cost or other basis.are being sold.
organization you give it to.
If your contributions are more than any of theBargain sales. A bargain sale of property (aGiving Property That limits that apply, see Carryovers, later.sale or exchange for less than the property's fair
market value) to a qualified organization is partlyHas Decreased in Value
a charitable contribution and partly a sale or 50% LimitIf you contribute property with a fair market value exchange. A bargain sale may result in a taxable
that is less than your basis in it, your deduction is gain. This limit applies to the total of all charitablelimited to its fair market value. You cannot claim contributions you make during the year. Thisa deduction for the difference between the prop- More information. For more information on means that your deduction for charitable contri-erty's basis and its fair market value. donated appreciated property, see Giving Prop- butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
erty That Has Increased in Value in Publication justed gross income for the year.
526. Generally, the 50% limit is the only limit thatGiving Property That
applies to gifts to organizations listed belowHas Increased in Value under 50% limit organizations. But there is one
exception. A special 30% limit also applies toIf you contribute property with a fair market value these gifts if they are gifts of capital gain prop-When To Deductthat is more than your basis in it, you may have erty for which you figure your deduction usingto reduce the fair market value by the amount of fair market value without reduction for apprecia-You can deduct your contributions only in theappreciation (increase in value) when you figure tion. (See Special 30% Limit for Capital Gainyear you actually make them in cash or otheryour deduction. Property, later.)property (or in a later carryover year, as ex-Your basis in property is generally what you plained later under Carryovers). This appliespaid for it. See chapter 13  if you need more 50% limit organizations. You can ask anywhether you use the cash or an accrual methodinformation about basis. organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-of accounting.Different rules apply to figuring your deduc- tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you may
tion, depending on whether the property is: check IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS atTime of making contribution. Usually, you
1-877-829-5500 (TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059).make a contribution at the time of its uncondi-• Ordinary income property, or
The following is a partial list of the types oftional delivery.• Capital gain property. organizations that are 50% limit organizations.
Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is
• Churches and conventions or associationsconsidered delivered on the date you mail it.Ordinary income property. Property is ordi- of churches. 
Credit card.  Contributions charged on yournary income property if its sale at fair market
• Educational organizations with a regularcredit card are deductible in the year you makevalue on the date it was contributed would have
faculty and curriculum that normally havethe charge.resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-
a regularly enrolled student body attendingtal gain. Examples of ordinary income property Pay-by-phone account.  If you use a classes on site. are inventory, works of art created by the donor, pay-by-phone account, the date the financialmanuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital • Hospitals and certain medical research or-institution pays the amount is the date you makeassets (defined in chapter 14 ) held 1 year or ganizations associated with these hospi-a contribution.less. tals. 
Stock certificate. A gift to a charity of aAmount of deduction. The amount you • Publicly supported charities.properly endorsed stock certificate is completedcan deduct for a contribution of ordinary income on the date of mailing or other delivery to theproperty is its fair market value minus the charity or to the charity's agent. However, if youamount that would be ordinary income or 30% Limitgive a stock certificate to your agent or to theshort-term capital gain if you sold the property issuing corporation for transfer to the name offor its fair market value. Generally, this rule limits A 30% limit applies to the following gifts.the charity, your gift is not completed until thethe deduction to your basis in the property. date the stock is transferred on the books of the • Gifts to all qualified organizations other
corporation. than 50% limit organizations. This includesExample. You donate stock that you held gifts to veterans' organizations, fraternalPromissory note. If you issue and deliver afor 5 months to your church. The fair market societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer-promissory note to a charitable organization asvalue of the stock on the day you donate it is tain private nonoperating foundations.a contribution, it is not a contribution until you$1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).
make the note payments.Because the $200 of appreciation would be • Gifts for the use of any organization.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 163

Page 166 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, if these gifts are of capital gain prop- Contributions of $250 or More
erty, they are subject to the 20% limit, described Records To Keep You can claim a deduction for a contribution oflater, rather than the 30% limit.
$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg-You must keep records to prove the amount of ment of your contribution from the qualified or-Student living with you. Amounts you spend the contributions you make during the year. The ganization or certain payroll deduction records.on behalf of a student living with you are subject kind of records you must keep depends on the If you made more than one contribution ofamount of your contributions and whether theyto the 30% limit. These amounts are considered $250 or more, you must have either a separateare:a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza- acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg-
tion. See Expenses Paid for Student Living With • Cash contributions, ment that lists each contribution and the date of
You, earlier. each contribution and shows your total contribu-• Noncash contributions, or tions.
• Out-of-pocket expenses when donatingSpecial 30% Limit for Amount of contribution. In figuring whetheryour services.
your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-Capital Gain Property
bine separate contributions. For example, if you
A special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gain gave your church $25 each week, your weeklyNote. An organization generally must give
property to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts of payments do not have to be combined. Eachyou a written statement if it receives a payment
payment is a separate contribution.from you that is more than $75 and is partly acapital gain property to other organizations, see
If contributions are made by payroll deduc-contribution and partly for goods or services.20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limit
tion, the deduction from each paycheck is(See Contributions From Which You Benefitdoes not apply when you choose to reduce the
treated as a separate contribution.under Contributions You Can Deduct , earlier.)fair market value of the property by the amount If you made a payment that is partly forKeep the statement for your records. It maythat would have been long-term capital gain if goods and services, as described earlier undersatisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require-you had sold the property. Instead, only the 50% Contributions From Which You Benefit , yourments explained in the following discussions.limit applies. contribution is the amount of the payment that is
more than the value of the goods and services.Cash Contributions
Two separate 30% limits. This special 30% Acknowledgment. The acknowledgmentlimit for capital gain property is separate from the Cash contributions include those paid by cash, must meet these tests.check, electronic funds transfer, credit card, orother 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of a
payroll deduction.contribution subject to one 30% limit does not 1. It must be written.
You cannot deduct a cash contribution, re-reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu- 2. It must include:gardless of the amount, unless you keep one oftions subject to the other 30% limit. However, the following. a. The amount of cash you contributed,the total you deduct cannot be more than 50% of
your adjusted gross income. 1. A bank record that shows the name of the b. Whether the qualified organization gave
qualified organization, the date of the con- you any goods or services as a result ofExample. Your adjusted gross income is tribution, and the amount of the contribu- your contribution (other than certain to-
$50,000. During the year, you gave capital gain tion. Bank records may include: ken items and membership benefits),
property with a fair market value of $15,000 to a c. A description and good faith estimate ofa. A canceled check,50% limit organization. You do not choose to the value of any goods or services de-reduce the property's fair market value by its b. A bank or credit union statement, or scribed in (b) (other than intangible re-appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000 ligious benefits), andc. A credit card statement.cash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%
d. A statement that the only benefit youlimit organization. The $15,000 gift of property is 2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com- received was an intangible religioussubject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000 munication) from the qualified organization benefit, if that was the case. The ac-cash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Both showing the name of the organization, the knowledgment does not need to de-gifts are fully deductible because neither is more date of the contribution, and the amount of scribe or estimate the value of anthe contribution.than the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in each intangible religious benefit. An intangi-
case) and together they are not more than the ble religious benefit is a benefit that3. The payroll deduction records described
50% limit ($25,000). generally is not sold in commercialnext.
transactions outside a donative (gift)For more information, see the rules for elect- In the case of a cash contribution made for context. An example is admission to aing the 50% limit for capital gain property under the relief of victims of the January 12, 2010, religious ceremony.How To Figure Your Deduction When Limits earthquake in Haiti, a telephone bill qualifies as
Apply in Publication 526. a receipt in (2) above if it shows the name of the 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:organization and the date and amount of the
contribution. However, if you made that contri- a. The date you file your return for the20% Limit bution after January 11, 2010, and before March year you make the contribution, or
1, 2010, and deducted it on your 2009 return,This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop- b. The due date, including extensions, foryou cannot deduct it on your 2010 return.erty to or for the use of qualified organizations filing the return.
(other than gifts of capital gain property to 50% Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu-
limit organizations). If the acknowledgment does not show thetion by payroll deduction, you must keep:
date of the contribution, you must also have a
1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document bank record or receipt, as described earlier, thatCarryovers furnished by your employer that shows the does show the date of the contribution. If the
date and amount of the contribution, and acknowledgment does show the date of the con-You can carry over your contributions that you
tribution and meets the other tests just de-2. A pledge card or other document preparedare not able to deduct in the current year be- scribed, you do not need any other records.by or for the qualified organization thatcause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income
shows the name of the organization.limits. You can deduct the excess in each of the Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu-
next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyond If your employer withheld $250 or more from a tion by payroll deduction and your employer
that time. For more information, see Carryovers single paycheck, see Contributions of $250 or withheld $250 or more from a single paycheck,
in Publication 526. More, next. you must keep:
Page 164 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 167 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document Additional records. You must also keep reli- 1. It must be written.
able written records for each item of donatedfurnished by your employer that shows the 2. It must include:property. Your written records must include theamount withheld as a contribution, and
following information. a. A description (but not necessarily the2. A pledge card or other document prepared
value) of any property you contributed,• The name and address of the organizationby or for the qualified organization that
to which you contributed.shows the name of the organization and b. Whether the qualified organization gave
states the organization does not provide you any goods or services as a result of• The date and location of the contribution.goods or services in return for any contri- your contribution (other than certain to-• A description of the property in detail rea-bution made to it by payroll deduction. ken items and membership benefits),sonable under the circumstances. For a andA single pledge card may be kept for all contribu- security, keep the name of the issuer, thetions made by payroll deduction regardless of type of security, and whether it is regularly c. A description and good faith estimate of
amount as long as it contains all the required traded on a stock exchange or in an the value of any goods or services de-information. over-the-counter market. scribed in (b). If the only benefit you
If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or received was an intangible religious• The fair market value of the property at theother document does not show the date of the benefit (such as admission to a relig-time of the contribution and how you fig-contribution, you must also have another docu- ious ceremony) that generally is notured the fair market value. If it was deter-ment that does show the date of the contribution. sold in a commercial transactionmined by appraisal, keep a signed copy ofIf the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or other outside the donative context, the ac-the appraisal. document does show the date of the contribu- knowledgment must say so and does• The cost or other basis of the property iftion, you do not need any other records except not need to describe or estimate theyou must reduce its fair market value bythose just described in (1) and (2). value of the benefit.appreciation. Your records should also in-
clude the amount of the reduction and howNoncash Contributions 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:you figured it. If you choose the 50% limit
instead of the special 30% limit on certain a. The date you file your return for theFor a contribution not made in cash, the records capital gain property, you must keep a re- year you make the contribution, oryou must keep depend on whether your deduc- cord showing the years for which yoution for the contribution is: b. The due date, including extensions, formade the choice, contributions for the cur-
filing the return.rent year to which the choice applies, and1. Less than $250,
carryovers from preceding years to which2. At least $250 but not more than $500, the choice applies. See How To Figure
Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, or
Deductions Over $500lication 526 for information on how to4. Over $5,000. make the capital gain property election.
You are required to give additional information if
• The amount you claim as a deduction for you claim a deduction over $500 for noncashAmount of deduction. In figuring whether the tax year as a result of the contribution, charitable contributions. See Records To Keepyour deduction is $500 or more, combine your if you contribute less than your entire inter- in Publication 526 for more information.claimed deductions for all similar items of prop- est in the property during the tax year.
erty donated to any charitable organization dur- Your records must include the amount you
Out-of-Pocket Expensesing the year. claimed as a deduction in any earlier
If you received goods or services in return, years for contributions of other interests in
If you render services to a qualified organizationthis property. They must also include theas described earlier in Contributions From
and have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expensesname and address of each organization toWhich You Benefit, reduce your contribution by
related to those services, the following threewhich you contributed the other interests,the value of those goods or services. If you
rules apply.the place where any such tangible prop-figure your deduction by reducing the fair market
erty is located or kept, and the name ofvalue of the donated property by its apprecia- 1. You must have adequate records to proveany person in possession of the property,tion, as described earlier in Giving Property That the amount of the expenses.other than the organization to which youHas Increased in Value, your contribution is the
contributed. 2. You must get an acknowledgment from thereduced amount.
qualified organization that contains:• The terms of any conditions attached to
the gift of property. a. A description of the services you pro-Deductions of Less Than $250
vided,
If you make any noncash contribution, you must Deductions of At Least $250 b. A statement of whether or not the or-get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ- But Not More Than $500 ganization provided you any goods orization showing: services to reimburse you for the ex-If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not penses you incurred,1. The name of the charitable organization, more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-
bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg- c. A description and a good faith estimate2. The date and location of the charitable
ment of your contribution from the qualified of the value of any goods or servicescontribution, and
organization. If you made more than one contri- (other than intangible religious benefits)3. A reasonably detailed description of the bution of $250 or more, you must have either a provided to reimburse you, andproperty. separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-
d. A statement that the only benefit youknowledgment that shows your total contribu-
A letter or other written communication received was an intangible religioustions.
from the charitable organization ac- benefit, if that was the case. The ac-The acknowledgment must contain the infor-
knowledging receipt of the contribution knowledgment does not need to de-
TIPmation in items (1) through (3) listed under De-
and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3) scribe or estimate the value of anductions of Less Than $250 , earlier, and your
will serve as a receipt. intangible religious benefit (defined ear-written records must include the information
You are not required to have a receipt where lier under Acknowledgment).listed in that discussion under Additional rec-
it is impractical to get one (for example, if you ords.
leave property at a charity's unattended drop 3. You must get the acknowledgment on orThe acknowledgment must also meet these
site). tests. before the earlier of:
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 165

Page 168 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The date you file your return for the disasters do not apply to losses occurring in Useful Items
year you make the contribution, or 2010 and later years. Instead, these losses are You may want to see:
subject to the 10%-of-AGI limit and are deducti-b. The due date, including extensions, for ble only if you itemize your deductions. These Publicationfiling the return. losses continue to be subject to the ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions$100-per-loss limit.  of AssetsCar expenses. If you claim expenses directly At the time this publication went to ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and related to use of your car in giving services to a print, Congress was considering legis-  Theftsqualified organization, you must keep reliable lation that would do the following.
CAUTION
!
written records of your expenses. Whether your ❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft • Increase the personal casualty and theftrecords are considered reliable depends on all  Loss Workbook (Personal-Useloss limit to the excess of the loss overthe facts and circumstances. Generally, they  Property)$500 (instead of $100).may be considered reliable if you made them
regularly and at or near the time you had the • In the case of federally declared disaster Form (and Instructions)
expenses. area losses occurring in 2010, the net dis- ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) ItemizedYour records must show the name of the aster loss would be exempt from the Deductionsorganization you were serving and the date 10%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit and
each time you used your car for a charitable be deductible even if you do not itemize ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate of your deductions. and Losses
14 cents a mile, your records must show the
❏ Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040)miles you drove your car for the charitable pur- To find out whether the legislation has been Standard Deduction for Certainpose. If you deduct your actual expenses, your enacted, go to IRS.gov. Filersrecords must show the costs of operating the car
that are directly related to a charitable purpose. ❏ 4684 Casualties and Thefts
See Car expenses under Out-of-Pocket Ex-
penses in Giving Services , earlier, for the ex-
Introductionpenses you can deduct.
This chapter explains the tax treatment of per-
Casualtysonal (not business or investment related) casu-
alty losses, theft losses, and losses on deposits.
A casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss ofThe chapter also explains the followingHow To Report
property resulting from an identifiable event that topics.
is sudden, unexpected, or unusual.Report your charitable contributions on Sched- • How to figure the amount of your loss.ule A (Form 1040). • A sudden event is one that is swift, not• How to treat insurance and other reim-If your total deduction for all noncash contri- gradual or progressive.bursements you receive.butions for the year is over $500, you must also
• An unexpected event is one that is ordi-file Form 8283. See How To Report  in Publica- • The deduction limits. narily unanticipated and unintended.tion 526 for more information.
• When and how to report a casualty or • An unusual event is one that is not atheft. day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-
cal of the activity in which you were en-
gaged.Forms to file.   When you have a casualty or
theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also
have to file one or more of the following forms. Deductible losses. Deductible casualty25.
losses can result from a number of different• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-
causes, including the following.tions
• Car accidents (but see Nondeductible• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital GainsNonbusiness losses, next, for exceptions). and Losses
• Earthquakes.• Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040), Stan-Casualty and dard Deduction for Certain Filers • Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next,
for exceptions). 
Theft Losses Condemnations. For information on condem- • Floods.nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-
• Government-ordered demolition or reloca-sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544.
tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-What's New for 2010 Workbook for casualties and thefts. Publi- cause of a disaster as discussed undercation 584 is available to help you make a list of Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. your stolen or damaged personal-use propertyDecrease in personal casualty and theft loss
• Mine cave-ins.and figure your loss. It includes schedules tolimit. Each personal casualty or theft loss is
help you figure the loss on your home, its con-limited to the excess of the loss over $100 (in- • Shipwrecks. tents, and your motor vehicles.stead of $500). In addition, the 10%-of-AGI limit
• Sonic booms. continues to apply to the net loss. Other sources of information. For informa-
• Storms, including hurricanes and torna-tion on a casualty or theft loss of business orDamage from corrosive drywall. Under a does. income-producing property, see Publicationspecial procedure, you may be able to claim a
547.casualty loss deduction for amounts you paid to • Terrorist attacks.
repair damage to your home and household • Vandalism.appliances that resulted from corrosive drywall.
For details, see Publication 547. • Volcanic eruptions.
Disaster losses. The special rules that were
in effect in 2008 and 2009 for losses of personal
use property attributable to federally declared
Page 166 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 169 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nondeductible losses. A casualty loss is not • Embezzlement. Casualty loss or ordinary loss. You can
choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu-deductible if the damage or destruction is • Extortion. alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year incaused by the following.
• Kidnapping for ransom. which you can reasonably estimate how much of• Accidentally breaking articles such as your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or• Larceny.glassware or china under normal condi- bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-tions. • Robbery. erally made on the return you file for that year
and applies to all your losses on deposits for the• A family pet (explained below).
The taking of money or property through fraud year in that particular financial institution. If you• A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, youelse to set it. state or local law. cannot treat the same amount of the loss as a
nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomes• A car accident if your willful negligence or Decline in market value of stock. You can- worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-willful act caused it. The same is true if the not deduct as a theft loss the decline in market ness bad debt deduction for any amount of losswillful act or willful negligence of someone value of stock acquired on the open market for that is more than the estimated amount youacting for you caused the accident. investment if the decline is caused by disclosure deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Onceof accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct• Progressive deterioration (explained later). you make this choice, you cannot change itby the officers or directors of the corporation that without permission from the Internal RevenueFamily pet. Loss of property due to damage issued the stock. However, you can deduct as a Service.capital loss the loss you sustain when you sell orby a family pet is not deductible as a casualty If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aexchange the stock or the stock becomes com-loss unless the requirements discussed earlier miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedulepletely worthless. You report a capital loss onunder Casualty are met. A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amountSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you areabout stock sales, worthless stock, and capitalExample. Your antique oriental rug was married filing separately) reduced by any ex-losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550.damaged by your new puppy before it was pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss ishousebroken. Because the damage was not un- subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeMislaid or lost property. The simple disap-expected and unusual, the loss is not deductible limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinarypearance of money or property is not a theft.as a casualty loss. loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.However, an accidental loss or disappearance
Progressive deterioration. Loss of prop- of property can qualify as a casualty if it results Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseerty due to progressive deterioration is not de- from an identifiable event that is sudden, unex- to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as anductible as a casualty loss. This is because the pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and ordinary loss, you must wait until the year thedamage results from a steadily operating cause unusual events are defined earlier. actual loss is determined and deduct the loss asor a normal process, rather than from a sudden a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.Example. A car door is accidentallyevent. The following are examples of damage
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting ofdue to progressive deterioration. How to report. The kind of deduction youyour diamond ring. The diamond falls from the choose for your loss on deposits determines• The steady weakening of a building due to ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond how you report your loss. If you choose:normal wind and weather conditions. is a casualty.
• Casualty loss Ð report it on Form 4684• The deterioration and damage to a water Losses from Ponzi-type investment first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).heater that bursts. However, the rust and schemes. If you had a loss from a Ponzi-typewater damage to rugs and drapes caused • Ordinary loss Ð report it on Schedule Ainvestment scheme, see:by the bursting of a water heater does (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized
qualify as a casualty. • Revenue Ruling 2009-9, 2009-14 I.R.B. deduction.
735 (available at www.irs.gov/irb/• Most losses of property caused by • Nonbusiness bad debt Ð report it on2009-14_IRB/ar07.html).droughts. To be deductible, a Schedule D (Form 1040).
• Revenue Procedure 2009-20, 2009-14drought-related loss generally must be in-
I.R.B. 749 (available at www.irs.gov/irb/curred in a trade or business or in a trans-
More information. For more information, see2009-14_IRB/ar11.html).action entered into for profit. 
Special Treatment for Losses on Deposits in
These losses are deductible as theft losses of• Termite or moth damage. Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in
income-producing property on your tax return for the Instructions for Form 4684 or Deposit in• The damage or destruction of trees, the year the loss was discovered. You figure the Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institution  inshrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis- deductible loss in Section B of Form 4684. If you Publication 550.ease, insects, worms, or similar pests. qualify to use Revenue Procedure 2009-20 andHowever, a sudden destruction due to an you choose to follow the procedures in Revenueunexpected or unusual infestation of beet- Procedure 2009-20, you also must completeles or other insects may result in a casu- Appendix A of that procedure and write ªReve-alty loss. Proof of Lossnue Procedure 2009-20º across the top of Form
4684. For more information, see the above reve- To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must benue ruling and revenue procedure. able to prove that you had a casualty or theft.
You also must be able to support the amount
you take as a deduction.Theft
Casualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, yourLoss on DepositsA theft is the taking and removing of money or
records should show all the following.property with the intent to deprive the owner of it.
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, creditThe taking of property must be illegal under the • The type of casualty (car accident, fire,union, or other financial institution becomes in-laws of the state where it occurred and it must storm, etc.) and when it occurred.solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type ofhave been done with criminal intent. You do not
• That the loss was a direct result of theloss, you can choose one of the following waysneed to show a conviction for theft. casualty.to deduct the loss.Theft includes the taking of money or prop-
• That you were the owner of the propertyerty by the following means. • As a casualty loss.
or, if you leased the property from some-• Blackmail. • As an ordinary loss. one else, that you were contractually liable
• Burglary. • As a nonbusiness bad debt. to the owner for the damage.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 167

Page 170 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Whether a claim for reimbursement exists FMV of stolen property. The FMV of property a measure of the decrease in FMV if you meet
for which there is a reasonable expecta- immediately after a theft is considered to be all the following conditions.
tion of recovery. zero, since you no longer have the property. • The repairs are actually made.
Example. Several years ago, you pur- • The repairs are necessary to bring theTheft loss proof. For a theft loss, your rec- chased silver dollars at face value for $150. This property back to its condition before theords should show all the following. is your adjusted basis in the property. Your silver casualty.
• When you discovered that your property dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of the • The amount spent for repairs is not exces-was missing. coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen, sive.and insurance did not cover them. Your theft• That your property was stolen. loss is $150. • The repairs take care of the damage only.
• That you were the owner of the property. • The value of the property after the repairsRecovered stolen property. Recovered sto-
• Whether a claim for reimbursement exists is not, due to the repairs, more than thelen property is your property that was stolen and
for which there is a reasonable expecta- value of the property before the casualty.later returned to you. If you recovered property
tion of recovery. after you had already taken a theft loss deduc-
Landscaping. The cost of restoring land-tion, you must refigure your loss using the
scaping to its original condition after a casualtysmaller of the property's adjusted basis (ex- It is important that you have records may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may beplained later) or the decrease in FMV from thethat will prove your deduction. If you do able to measure your loss by what you spend ontime just before it was stolen until the time it wasnot have the actual records to support
RECORDS the following.recovered. Use this amount to refigure your totalyour deduction, you can use other satisfactory
loss for the year in which the loss was deducted.evidence to support it. • Removing destroyed or damaged trees
If your refigured loss is less than the loss you and shrubs minus any salvage you re-
deducted, you generally have to report the dif- ceive.
ference as income in the recovery year. But
• Pruning and other measures taken to pre-report the difference only up to the amount of the
Figuring a Loss serve damaged trees and shrubs.loss that reduced your tax. For more information
on the amount to report, see Recoveries in • Replanting necessary to restore the prop-Figure the amount of your loss using the follow- chapter 12. erty to its approximate value before theing steps. casualty.
1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop- Figuring Decrease in FMVÐerty before the casualty or theft. Car value.  Books issued by various automo-Items To Consider bile organizations that list your car may be useful2. Determine the decrease in fair market
in figuring the value of your car. You can use theTo figure the decrease in FMV because of avalue of the property as a result of the
book's retail values and modify them by suchcasualty or theft, you generally need a compe-casualty or theft.
factors as mileage and the condition of your cartent appraisal. However, other measures can3. From the smaller of the amounts you de- to figure its value. The prices are not official, butalso be used to establish certain decreases.termined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur- they may be useful in determining value and
ance or other reimbursement you received Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif- suggesting relative prices for comparison with
or expect to receive. ference between the FMV of the property imme- current sales and offerings in your area. If your
diately before a casualty or theft and car is not listed in the books, determine its valueFor personal-use property and property used in
immediately afterward should be made by a from other sources. A dealer's offer for your carperforming services as an employee, apply the
competent appraiser. The appraiser must rec- as a trade-in on a new car is not usually adeduction limits, discussed later, to determine
ognize the effects of any general market decline measure of its true value.the amount of your deductible loss.
that may occur along with the casualty. This
Gain from reimbursement. If your reim- information is needed to limit any deduction to
bursement is more than your adjusted basis in the actual loss resulting from damage to the Figuring Decrease in FMVÐ
the property, you have a gain. This is true even if property. Items Not To Consider
the decrease in the FMV of the property is Several factors are important in evaluating
smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have a the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- You generally should not consider the following
gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may lowing. items when attempting to establish the decrease
be able to postpone reporting the gain. See in FMV of your property.• The appraiser's familiarity with your prop-Publication 547 for more information on how to erty before and after the casualty or theft. Cost of protection. The cost of protectingtreat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualty
your property against a casualty or theft is notor theft. • The appraiser's knowledge of sales of
part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount youcomparable property in the area.
Leased property. If you are liable for casualty spend on insurance or to board up your house• The appraiser's knowledge of conditions indamage to property you lease, your loss is the against a storm is not part of your loss.the area of the casualty.amount you must pay to repair the property If you make permanent improvements tominus any insurance or other reimbursement • The appraiser's method of appraisal. your property to protect it against a casualty oryou receive or expect to receive. theft, add the cost of these improvements to
your basis in the property. An example would beYou may be able to use an appraisal the cost of a dike to prevent flooding.Decrease in that you used to get a federal loan (or a
federal loan guarantee) as the result of Exception. You cannot increase your basisFair Market Value
TIP
a federally declared disaster to establish the in the property by, or deduct as a business
amount of your disaster loss. For more informa-Fair market value (FMV) is the price for which expense, any expenditures you made with re-
tion on disasters, see Disaster Area Losses, inyou could sell your property to a willing buyer spect to qualified disaster mitigation payments.
Pub. 547.when neither of you has to sell or buy and both of See Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
you know all the relevant facts.
Related expenses. Any incidental expensesThe decrease in FMV used to figure the Cost of cleaning up or making repairs. The
you have due to a casualty or theft, such asamount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ- cost of repairing damaged property is not part of
expenses for the treatment of personal injuries,ence between the property's fair market value a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up
for temporary housing, or for a rental car, are notimmediately before and immediately after the after a casualty. But you can use the cost of
part of your casualty or theft loss.casualty or theft. cleaning up or making repairs after a casualty as
Page 168 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 171 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto- collision, the $1000 would be deductible (subject Form 1040, line 21. However, if the casualty
len or destroyed property is not part of a casualty to the deduction limits discussed later). This is occurs in a federally declared disaster area,
or theft loss. true even if you do not file an insurance claim, none of the insurance payments are taxable.
because your insurance policy would never See Qualified disaster relief payments , underSentimental value. Do not consider senti- have reimbursed you for the deductible. Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.mental value when determining your loss. If a
A temporary increase in your living expensesfamily portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-
is the difference between the actual living ex-aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your Types of Reimbursements penses you and your family incurred during theloss on its FMV.
period you could not use your home and yourThe most common type of reimbursement is anDecline in market value of property in or near normal living expenses for that period. Actualinsurance payment for your stolen or damagedcasualty area. A decrease in the value of your living expenses are the reasonable and neces-property. Other types of reimbursements areproperty because it is in or near an area that sary expenses incurred because of the loss ofdiscussed next. Also see the Instructions forsuffered a casualty, or that might again suffer a your main home. Generally, these expenses in-Form 4684.casualty, is not to be taken into consideration. clude the amounts you pay for the following.You have a loss only for actual casualty damage Employer's emergency disaster fund. If you • Rent for suitable housing.to your property. However, if your home is in a
receive money from your employer's emergencyfederally declared disaster area, see Disaster • Transportation.disaster fund and you must use that money toArea Losses in Publication 547.
rehabilitate or replace property on which you are • Food.
Costs of photographs and appraisals. Pho- claiming a casualty loss deduction, you must • Utilities.tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful in take that money into consideration in computing
establishing the condition and value of the prop- the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider- • Miscellaneous services.
erty after it was damaged. Photographs showing ation only the amount you used to replace your Normal living expenses consist of these samethe condition of the property after it was re- destroyed or damaged property. expenses that you would have incurred but didpaired, restored, or replaced may also be help-
not because of the casualty or the threat of one.ful. Example. Your home was extensively dam-
   Appraisals are used to figure the decrease aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse- Example. As a result of a fire, you vacatedin FMV because of a casualty or theft. See ment from your insurance company was your apartment for a month and moved to aAppraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease in $10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief motel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.FMV Ð Items To Consider , for information fund for its employees. Employees receiving None was charged for the month the apartmentabout appraisals. money from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate was vacated. Your motel rent for this month wasThe costs of photographs and appraisals or replace their damaged or destroyed property. $1,200. You normally pay $200 a month forused as evidence of the value and condition of You received $4,000 from the fund and spent
food. Your food expenses for the month youproperty damaged as a result of a casualty are the entire amount on repairs to your home. In
lived in the motel were $400. You receivednot a part of the loss. You can claim these costs figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subject $1,100 from your insurance company to coveryour unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on your living expenses. You determine the pay-you received from your employer's fund. YourSchedule A (Form 1040). For information about ment you must include in income as follows.casualty loss before applying the deduction lim-miscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28. its discussed later is $6,000. 1) Insurance payment for living
expenses ................. . $1,100Adjusted Basis Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cash 2) Actual expenses during thegifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits month you are unable to useAdjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu- on how you can use the money, you do not your home because of fire .. . 1,600ally cost) increased or decreased by various reduce your casualty loss by these excludable 3) Normal living expenses .... . 725events, such as improvements and casualty cash gifts. This applies even if you use the 4) Temporary increase in living losses. For more information, see chapter 13. money to pay for repairs to property damaged in expenses: Subtract line 3
the disaster. from line 2 ................. . 875
5) Amount of payment includible Insurance and Other
in income: Subtract line 4 Example. Your home was damaged by a
Reimbursements from line 1 ................. . $ 225hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash
gifts to you that were excludable from your in-If you receive an insurance payment or other come. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for Tax year of inclusion. You include the tax-type of reimbursement, you must subtract the repairs to your home. There were no limits or able part of the insurance payment in income forreimbursement when you figure your loss. You restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts. the year you regain the use of your main homedo not have a casualty or theft loss to the extent Because it was an excludable gift, the money or, if later, for the year you receive the taxableyou are reimbursed. you received and used to pay for repairs to your part of the insurance payment.If you expect to be reimbursed for part or all home does not reduce your casualty loss on theof your loss, you must subtract the expected damaged home. Example. Your main home was destroyedreimbursement when you figure your loss. You
by a tornado in August 2008. You regained usemust reduce your loss even if you do not receive Insurance payments for living expenses. of your home in November 2009. The insurancepayment until a later tax year. See Reimburse- You do not reduce your casualty loss by insur- payments you received in 2008 and 2009 werement Received After Deducting Loss, later. ance payments you receive to cover living ex- $1,500 more than the temporary increase in
penses in either of the following situations.Failure to file a claim for reimbursement. If your living expenses during those years. You
your property is covered by insurance, you must include this amount in income on your 2009• You lose the use of your main home be-file a timely insurance claim for reimbursement Form 1040. If, in 2010, you receive further pay-cause of a casualty.of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct this ments to cover the living expenses you had in• Government authorities do not allow youloss as a casualty or theft loss. However, this 2008 and 2009, you must include those pay-access to your main home because of arule does not apply to the portion of the loss not ments in income on your 2010 Form 1040.casualty or threat of one.covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-
ble).
Disaster relief. Food, medical supplies, andInclusion in income. If these insurance
other forms of assistance you receive do notpayments are more than the temporary increaseExample. You have a car insurance policy
reduce your casualty loss unless they arein your living expenses, you must include thewith a $1000 deductible. Because your insur-
excess in your income. Report this amount on replacements for lost or destroyed property.ance did not cover the first $1000 of an auto
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 169

Page 172 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule 10% Rule*
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One PersonÐ Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married CoupleÐ
With Loss From the Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
*The 10% rule does not apply to a net disaster loss from a disaster declared a federal disaster in tax years beginning after 2007 that occurred before 2010.
Qualified disaster relief payments you the loss in 2010 subject to the limits discussed the $850 from the insurance company in 2011,
receive for expenses you incurred as a do not report it as income.later.
result of a federally declared disaster
TIP
are not taxable income to you. For more infor- Actual reimbursement more than expected. Single Casualty onmation, see Disaster Area Losses in Publication If you later receive more reimbursement than
Multiple Properties547. you expected after you claimed a deduction for
the loss, you may have to include the extraDisaster unemployment assistance pay-
reimbursement in your income for the year youments are unemployment benefits that are tax- Personal property. Personal property is any
receive it. However, if any part of the originalable. property that is not real property. If your personal
deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed byGenerally, disaster relief grants and qualified
year, do not include that part of the reimburse- a casualty, you must figure your loss separatelydisaster mitigation payments made under the
ment in your income. You do not refigure your for each item of property. Then combine theseRobert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-
tax for the year you claimed the deduction. For separate losses to figure the total loss from thatgency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-
more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12. casualty or theft.surance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) are
not includible in your income. See Disaster Area If the total of all the reimbursements Example. A fire in your home destroyed anLosses in Publication 547. you receive is more than your adjusted upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-basis in the destroyed or stolen prop-
CAUTION
! tique table. You did not have fire insurance toerty, you will have a gain on the casualty or theft. cover your loss. (This was the only casualty orReimbursement Received After If you have already taken a deduction for a loss theft you had during the year.) You paid $750 forDeducting Loss and you receive the reimbursement in a later the chair and you established that it had an FMVyear, you may have to include the gain in your of $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000If you figured your casualty or theft loss using income for the later year. Include the gain as and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.your expected reimbursement, you may have to ordinary income up to the amount of your deduc- You bought the table at an auction for $100adjust your tax return for the tax year in which tion that reduced your tax for the earlier year. before discovering it was an antique. It had beenyou receive your actual reimbursement. This See Publication 547 for more information on appraised at $900 before the fire. You figuresection explains the adjustment you may have how to treat a gain from the reimbursement of a your loss on each of these items as follows:to make. casualty or theft.
Chair Rug TableActual reimbursement less than expected.
Actual reimbursement same as expected. IfIf you later receive less reimbursement than you 1) Basis (cost) ..... . $750 $3,000 $100you receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-expected, include that difference as a loss with
2) FMV before fire .. . $500 $2,500 $900pected to receive, you do not have to includeyour other losses (if any) on your return for the 3) FMV after fire .... . ±0± ±0± ±0±any of the reimbursement in your income andyear in which you can reasonably expect no 4) Decrease in FMV . . $500 $2,500 $900you cannot deduct any additional loss.more reimbursement. 5) Loss (smaller of (1) or
Example. In December 2010, you had a col-Example. Your personal car had an FMV of (4)) ........... . $500 $2,500 $100lision while driving your personal car. Repairs to$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision with
the car cost $950. You had $100 deductibleanother car in 2009. The accident was due to the 6) Total loss ...... . $3,100collision insurance. Your insurance companynegligence of the other driver. At the end of
agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-2009, there was a reasonable prospect that the
age. Because you expected a reimbursementowner of the other car would reimburse you in Real property. In figuring a casualty loss on
from the insurance company, you did not have afull. You did not have a deductible loss in 2009. personal-use real property, treat the entire prop-
casualty loss deduction in 2010.In January 2010, the court awarded you a erty (including any improvements, such as build-
Due to the $100 rule (discussed later underjudgment of $2,000. However, in July it became ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure the
Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100apparent that you will be unable to collect any loss using the smaller of the adjusted basis or
you paid as the deductible. When you receiveamount from the other driver. You can deduct the decrease in FMV of the entire property.
Page 170 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 173 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Base-Example. You bought your home a few Example. A hailstorm damages your home
Car ment years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the and your car. Determine the amount of loss, as
land and $140,000 for the house). You also discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since 1) Loss ............. . $1,800 $2,100spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire the losses are due to a single event, you com- 2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100
destroyed your home. The fire also damaged bine the losses and reduce the combined 3) Loss after $100 rule ... . $1,700 $2,000
the shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire amount by $100.
4) Total loss ............... . $3,700was your only casualty or theft loss this year. Single event. Generally, events closely re- 5) Subtract 10% ×  $25,000 AGI .. . 2,500Competent appraisers valued the property as a lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a 6) Casualty loss deduction .... . $1,200whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only single casualty when the damage is from two or$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house- Gains and losses. If you had both gains andmore closely related causes, such as wind andhold furnishings is not shown in this example. It losses from casualties or thefts to personal-useflood damage caused by the same storm.would be figured separately on each item, as property, you must compare your total gains toexplained earlier under Personal property .) your total losses. Do this after you have reducedShortly after the fire, the insurance company 10% Rule each loss by any reimbursements and by $100,paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your but before you have reduced the losses by 10%You must reduce the total of all your casualty orcasualty loss as follows: of your adjusted gross income.theft losses on personal-use property by 10% of
1) Adjusted basis of the entire your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule after Casualty or theft gains do not include
property (land, building, and you reduce each loss by $100. The 10% rule gains you choose to postpone. See
landscaping) ........... . $162,000 does not apply to a disaster declared a federal Publication 547 for information on the
CAUTION
!
disaster in tax years beginning after 2007 that postponement of gain.2) FMV of entire property before
occurred before 2010, which may be deductiblefire .................. . $200,000 Losses more than gains. If your losses areon your 2010 tax return. For more information,3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000
more than your recognized gains, subtract yoursee the Form 4684 instructions. If you have both4) Decrease in FMV of entire 
gains from your losses and reduce the result bygains and losses from casualties or thefts, seeproperty .............. . $170,000
10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, ifGains and losses, later in this discussion.5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) .. . $162,000 any, is your deductible loss from personal-use6) Subtract insurance ....... . 155,000 property.Example 1. In June, you discovered that7) Amount of loss after your house had been burglarized. Your loss Gains more than losses. If your recog-reimbursement ......... . $7,000 after insurance reimbursement was $2,000. nized gains are more than your losses, subtractYour adjusted gross income for the year you your losses from your gains. The difference isdiscovered the theft is $29,500. You first apply treated as capital gain and must be reported onthe $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure your Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does nottheft loss deduction as follows.Deduction Limits apply to your gains. 
1) Loss after insurance .......... . $2,000After you have figured your casualty or theft 2) Subtract $100 .............. . 100loss, you must figure how much of the loss you 3) Loss after $100 rule .......... . $1,900can deduct. If the loss was to property for your When To Report 4) Subtract 10% ×  $29,500 AGI .... . 2,950personal use or your family's use, there are two 5) Theft loss deduction ........ . ±0±limits on the amount you can deduct for your You do not have a theft loss deduction be- Gains and Lossescasualty or theft loss. cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule
($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross1. You must reduce each casualty or theft Gains. If you receive an insurance or otherincome ($2,950).loss by $100 ($100 rule). reimbursement that is more than your adjusted
basis in the destroyed or stolen property, you2. You must further reduce the total of all Example 2. In March, you had a car acci- have a gain from the casualty or theft. You mustyour casualty or theft losses by 10% of dent that totally destroyed your car. You did not include this gain in your income in the year youyour adjusted gross income (10% rule). have collision insurance on your car, so you did receive the reimbursement, unless you choosenot receive any insurance reimbursement. YourYou make these reductions on Form 4684. to postpone reporting the gain as explained inloss on the car was $1,800. In November, a fireThese rules are explained next and Table Publication 547.damaged your basement and totally destroyed25-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule and If you have a loss, see Table 25-2.the furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsthe 10% rule in various situations. For more
stored there. Your loss on the basement items Losses. Generally, you can deduct a casualtydetailed explanations and examples, see Publi-
after reimbursement was $2,100. Your adjusted loss that is not reimbursable only in the tax yearcation 547.
gross income for the year that the accident and in which the casualty occurred. This is true even
Property used partly for business and partly fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu- if you do not repair or replace the damaged
for personal purposes. When property is alty loss deduction as follows. property until a later year.
used partly for personal purposes and partly for
business or income-producing purposes, the Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Losscasualty or theft loss deduction must be figured
separately for the personal-use part and for the IF you have a loss...  THEN deduct it in the year...
business or income-producing part. You must
from a casualty, the loss occurred.figure each loss separately because the $100
rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on in a federally declared disaster area, the disaster occurred or the year immediately before thethe personal-use part of the property. disaster.
from a theft,  the theft was discovered.$100 Rule
on a deposit treated as a:
After you have figured your casualty or theft loss
 • casualty,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.on personal-use property, you must reduce that
loss by $100. This reduction applies to each total  • bad debt,  • deposits are totally worthless.
casualty or theft loss. It does not matter how
 • ordinary loss,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.many pieces of property are involved in an
event. Only a single $100 reduction applies.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 171

Page 174 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can deduct theft losses that are not • Any estate or trust that has tax records Net operating loss (NOL). If your casualty or
necessary to meet a postponed tax dead- theft loss deduction causes your deductions forreimbursable only in the year you discover your
line, provided those records are main- the year to be more than your income for theproperty was stolen.
tained in a covered disaster area. year, you may have an NOL. You can use anIf you are not sure whether part of your casu-
NOL to lower your tax in an earlier year, allowingalty or theft loss will be reimbursed, do not de- • The spouse on a joint return with a tax- you to get a refund for tax you have already paid.duct that part until the tax year when you payer who is eligible for postponements. Or, you can use it to lower your tax in a laterbecome reasonably certain that it will not be • Any individual, business entity, or sole year. You do not have to be in business to havereimbursed. proprietorship not located in a covered dis- an NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For more
aster area, but whose records necessary information, see Publication 536, Net OperatingLoss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on to meet a postponed tax deadline are lo- Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, anddeposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial cated in the covered disaster area. Trusts.institution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier.
• Any individual visiting the covered disaster
area who was killed or injured as a result
Disaster Area Loss of the disaster.
• Any other person determined by the IRSYou generally must deduct a casualty loss in the
to be affected by a federally declared dis-year it occurred. However, if you have a casualty
aster.loss from a federally declared disaster that oc- 26.
curred in an area warranting public or individual
Covered disaster area. This is an area of aassistance (or both), you can choose to deduct
federally declared disaster in which the IRS hasthe loss on your tax return or amended return for decided to postpone tax deadlines for up to 1either of the following years. Car Expensesyear.
• The year the disaster occurred.
Abatement of interest and penalties. The and Other• The year immediately preceding the year IRS may abate the interest and penalties on
the disaster occurred. underpaid income tax for the length of any post-
ponement of tax deadlines. EmployeeSee the Form 4684 instructions if you are de-
ducting a loss of personal use property from a More information. For more information, seedisaster declared a federal disaster in tax years Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. Businessbeginning after 2007 that occurred before 2010.
Gains.  Special rules apply if you choose to Expenses
postpone reporting gain on property damaged or How To Reportdestroyed in a federally declared disaster area.
For those special rules, see Publication 547. Gains and Losses What's New
Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible Standard mileage rate. For 2010, the stan-postpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more dard mileage rate for the cost of operating yourtaxpayers who are affected by a federally de- than one casualty or theft, use a separate Form car for business use is 50 cents per mile.clared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS may 4684 to determine your gain or loss for each
postpone include those for filing income and Car expenses and use of the standard mile-event. Combine the gains and losses on one
employment tax returns, paying income and em- age rate are explained under Transportation Ex-Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as to
penses, later.ployment taxes, and making contributions to a which lines to fill out. In addition, you must use
traditional IRA or Roth IRA. the appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss. Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, andThe schedule you use depends on whether youIf any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS will vans. For 2010, the first-year limit on the totalhave a gain or loss.publicize the postponement in your area by pub- section 179 deduction, special depreciation al-lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenue lowance, and depreciation deduction for carsIf you have a: Report it on:procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui- increases to $11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not todance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB). Gain ......... . Schedule D (Form claim the special depreciation allowance). For1040) trucks and vans the first-year limit has increasedWho is eligible. If the IRS postpones a tax Loss ......... . Schedule A (Form to $11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not to claim thedeadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for 1040) special depreciation allowance). For more infor-the postponement.
mation see Depreciation limits  in Publication• Any individual whose main home is lo- Note. Use Schedule L (Form 1040A or 463.cated in a covered disaster area (defined 1040) instead of Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
next). are deducting as part of your standard deduction
a net disaster loss from a disaster declared a• Any business entity or sole proprietor
federal disaster in tax years beginning afterwhose principal place of business is lo- Introduction2007 that occurred before 2010. Such a loss iscated in a covered disaster area.
deductible in 2010 if you were not sure whether You may be able to deduct the ordinary and• Any individual who is a relief worker affili- part of the loss would be reimbursed in the year necessary business-related expenses you haveated with a recognized government or phil- it occurred and you became reasonably certain for:
anthropic organization who is assisting in in 2010 that that part will not be reimbursed. • Travel,a covered disaster area.
Adjustments to basis. If you have a casualty • Entertainment,• Any individual, business entity, or sole or theft loss, you must decrease your basis in
proprietorship whose records are needed • Gifts, orthe property by any insurance or other reim-
to meet a postponed tax deadline, pro- bursement you receive, and by any deductible • Transportation.vided those records are maintained in a loss. Amounts you spend to restore your prop-
covered disaster area. The main home or An ordinary expense is one that is common anderty after a casualty increase your adjusted ba-
principal place of business does not have accepted in your trade or business. A necessarysis. See Adjusted Basis in chapter 13 for more
to be located in the covered disaster area. information. expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for
Page 172 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 175 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your business. An expense does not have to be you have deductible travel expenses. This sec- Tax Homerequired to be considered necessary. tion discusses:
To determine whether you are traveling awayThis chapter explains the following. • Traveling away from home,
from home, you must first determine the location• What expenses are deductible. • Tax home, of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular• How to report your expenses on your re- • Temporary assignment or job, and
place of business or post of duty, regardless ofturn. • What travel expenses are deductible. where you maintain your family home. It in-• What records you need to prove your ex- cludes the entire city or general area in whichIt also discusses the standard meal allowance,penses. your business or work is located.rules for travel inside and outside the United
If you have more than one regular place of• How to treat any expense reimbursements States, and deductible convention expenses.
business, your tax home is your main place ofyou may receive.
business. See Main place of business or work ,Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes,
later.travel expenses are the ordinary and necessaryWho does not need to use this chapter. If If you do not have a regular or a main placeexpenses (defined earlier) of traveling awayyou are an employee, you will not need to read of business because of the nature of your work,from home for your business, profession, or job.this chapter if all of the following are true. then your tax home may be the place where you
You will find examples of deductible travel regularly live. See No main place of business or• You fully accounted to your employer for
expenses in Table 26-1. work, later.your work-related expenses.
 If you do not have a regular or a main place• You received full reimbursement for your of business or post of duty and there is no placeTraveling Away Fromexpenses. where you regularly live, you are considered an
Home itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher-• Your employer required you to return any
ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claimexcess reimbursement and you did so. You are traveling away from home if: a travel expense deduction because you are• There is no amount shown with a code ªLº never considered to be traveling away from• Your duties require you to be away fromin box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and home.the general area of your tax home (definedTax Statement. later) substantially longer than an ordinary
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no Main place of business or work. If you haveday's work, and
need to show the expenses or the reimburse- more than one place of business or work, con-• You need to sleep or rest to meet thements on your return. See Reimbursements, sider the following when determining which onedemands of your work while away fromlater, if you would like more information on reim- is your main place of business or work.home.bursements and accounting to your employer. • The total time you ordinarily spend in eachThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place.If you meet these conditions and your napping in your car. You do not have to be awayemployer included reimbursements on • The level of your business activity in eachfrom your tax home for a whole day or from duskyour Form W-2 in error, ask your em- place.
TIPto dawn as long as your relief from duty is longployer for a corrected Form W-2. enough to get necessary sleep or rest. • Whether your income from each place is
significant or insignificant.
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.Useful Items
You leave your home terminal on a regularlyYou may want to see: Example. You live in Cincinnati where youscheduled round-trip run between two cities and have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, youPublication earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months inhave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseExpenses necessary sleep before starting the return trip. you spend most of your time there and earn
You are considered to be away from home.❏ 535 Business Expenses most of your income there.
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates Example 2. You are a truck driver. You No main place of business or work. Youleave your terminal and return to it later the may have a tax home even if you do not have aForm (and Instructions) same day. You get an hour off at your turn- regular or main place of business or work. Your❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized around point to eat. Because you are not off to tax home may be the home where you regularlyDeductions get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not live.
an adequate rest period, you are not traveling❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss Factors used to determine tax home. Ifaway from home.From Business you do not have a regular or main place of
business or work, use the following three factors❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a to determine where your tax home is. From Business
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 1. You perform part of your business in thenent duty assignment overseas, you are notFrom Farming area of your main home and use thattraveling away from home. You cannot deduct
home for lodging while doing business inyour expenses for meals and lodging. You can-❏ Form 2106 Employee Business
the area.not deduct these expenses even if you have toExpenses
maintain a home in the United States for your 2. You have living expenses at your main❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee family members who are not allowed to accom- home that you duplicate because yourBusiness Expenses pany you overseas. If you are transferred from business requires you to be away from that
one permanent duty station to another, you may home.
have deductible moving expenses, which are 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. both your historical place of lodging and
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty your claimed main home are located; youTravel Expenses
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living have a member or members of your family
facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travelIf you temporarily travel away from your tax living at your main home; or you often use
expense purposes.home, you can use this section to determine if that home for lodging.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 173

Page 176 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and youTable 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
and your family live in Tucson. You are em- This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you 
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal intravel away from home for business purposes. Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one
night there before returning home. You cannotIF you have
deduct any expenses you have for meals andexpenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is
your tax home.your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar
Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. TheWater Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in
rest of the year you work for the same employerPublication 463 for additional rules and limits.
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants
taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the
bus, and airport between: same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-
more.limousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and
Because you spend most of your working• The hotel and the work location of your customers or time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary that city is your tax home. You cannot deductwork location. any expenses you have for meals and lodging
there. However, when you return to work inbaggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax homeshipping regular and temporary work locations.
even though you stay at your family home. You
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from can deduct the cost of your round trip between
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deducthome on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the
your part of your family's living expenses forstandard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and
meals and lodging while you are living and work-parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,
ing in Pittsburgh. you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long Temporary Assignmentenough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
 or Jobperform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental
You may regularly work at your tax home andExpenses for additional rules and limits.
also work at another location. It may not be
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry. practical to return to your tax home from this
other location at the end of each work day.telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-business communication by fax machine or other
ment. If your assignment or job away fromcommunication devices.
your main place of work is temporary, your tax
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. home does not change. You are considered to
be away from home for the whole period you areother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your away from your main place of work. You canbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation deduct your travel expenses if they otherwiseto or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporarycomputer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house assignment in a single location is one that is
trailer. realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home community contacts in Boston. When you com- nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
is the home where you regularly live. If you plete your training, you are transferred to Los comes your new tax home and you cannot
satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax Angeles. deduct your travel expenses while there. An
home depending on all the facts and circum- assignment or job in a single location is consid-You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did
stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are an ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastnot work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
itinerant; your tax home is wherever you work for more than 1 year, whether or not it actuallycause you had duplicate living expenses. You
and you cannot deduct travel expenses. lasts for more than 1 year.also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
If your assignment is indefinite, you mustdon your apartment in Boston as your main
Example. You are single and live in Boston include in your income any amounts you receivehome, you kept your community contacts, and
in an apartment you rent. You have worked for from your employer for living expenses, even ifyou frequently returned to live in your apartment.your employer in Boston for a number of years. they are called travel allowances and you ac-You have a tax home in Boston.Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu- count to your employer for them. You may be
tive training program. You do not expect to re- able to deduct the cost of relocating to your newTax home different from family home. If youturn to work in Boston after you complete your tax home as a moving expense. See Publication(and your family) do not live at your tax hometraining. 521 for more information.(defined earlier), you cannot deduct the cost ofDuring your training, you do not do any work traveling between your tax home and your family Exception for federal crime investigations orin Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and home. You also cannot deduct the cost of meals prosecutions. If you are a federal employeeon-the-job training throughout the United States. and lodging while at your tax home. See Exam- participating in a federal crime investigation orYou keep your apartment in Boston and return to ple 1 that follows. prosecution, you are not subject to the 1-yearit frequently. You use your apartment to conduct
If you are working temporarily in the same rule. This means you may be able to deductyour personal business. You also keep up your
city where you and your family live, you may be travel expenses even if you are away from your
considered as traveling away from home. See tax home for more than 1 year, provided you
Example 2 later. meet the other requirements for deductibility.
Page 174 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 177 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or along with supporting documentation, are de- Business-related entertainment is discussed
his or her designee) must certify that you are under Entertainment Expenses , later. The fol-scribed in Table 26-2, later.
traveling: lowing discussion deals only with meals (and
incidental expenses) that are not busi-Separating costs. If you have one expense• For the federal government, ness-related entertainment.that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,• In a temporary duty status, and and other services (such as lodging or transpor- Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deducttation), you must allocate that expense between• To investigate or prosecute, or provide expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-the cost of meals and entertainment and the costsupport services for the investigation or gant. An expense is not considered lavish orprosecution of a federal crime. of other services. You must have a reasonable extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsbasis for making this allocation. For example, and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in- lowed merely because they are more than aDetermining temporary or indefinite. You cludes one or more meals in its room charge. fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-must determine whether your assignment is
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.temporary or indefinite when you start work. If Travel expenses for another individual. If ayou expect an assignment or job to last for 1
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with 50% limit on meals. You can figure your mealyear or less, it is temporary unless there are
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to a expenses using either of the following methods.facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
business convention, you generally cannot de-An assignment or job that is initially temporary • Actual cost.duct his or her travel expenses.may become indefinite due to changed circum-
• The standard meal allowance.stances. A series of assignments to the same Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
location, all for short periods but that together penses of someone who goes with you if that Both of these methods are explained below. But,
cover a long period, may be considered an in- person: regardless of the method you use, you generally
definite assignment. can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost1. Is your employee, of your meals.
Going home on days off. If you go back to 2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the If you are reimbursed for the cost of youryour tax home from a temporary assignment on travel, and meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onyour days off, you are not considered away from
whether your employer's reimbursement plan3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct thehome while you are in your hometown. You
was accountable or nonaccountable. If you aretravel expenses.cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whethering there. However, you can deduct your travel
the unreimbursed meal expense is for businessBusiness associate. If a business associ-expenses, including meals and lodging, while
travel or business entertainment. The 50% limitate travels with you and meets the conditions intraveling between your temporary place of work
is explained later under Entertainment Ex-(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the traveland your tax home. You can claim these ex-
penses. Accountable and nonaccountable plansexpenses you have for that person. A businesspenses up to the amount it would have cost you
are discussed later under Reimbursements.associate is someone with whom you could rea-to stay at your temporary place of work.
sonably expect to actively conduct business. AIf you keep your hotel room during your visit Actual cost. You can use the actual cost ofbusiness associate can be a current or prospec-home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel your meals to figure the amount of your expensetive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,room. In addition, you can deduct your ex- before reimbursement and application of theemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-penses of returning home up to the amount you 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, yousor.would have spent for meals had you stayed at must keep records of your actual cost.your temporary place of work. Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide
business purpose exists if you can prove a real Standard meal allowance. Generally, you
Probationary work period. If you take a job business purpose for the individual's presence. can use the ªstandard meal allowanceº method
that requires you to move, with the understand- Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- as an alternative to the actual cost method. It
ing that you will keep the job if your work is sisting in entertaining customers, are not allows you to use a set amount for your daily
satisfactory during a probationary period, the job meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), insteadenough to make the expenses deductible.is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of your of keeping records of your actual costs. The set
expenses for meals and lodging during the pro- Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- amount varies depending on where and when
bationary period. you travel. In this chapter, ªstandard meal allow-ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is
anceº refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis-not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types
cussed later under Amount of standard mealnotes, performs similar services, and accompa-What Travel Expenses Are
allowance. If you use the standard meal allow-nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-Deductible? ance, you still must keep records to prove theformance of these services does not establish
time, place, and business purpose of your travel.that her presence on the trip is necessary to theOnce you have determined that you are travel- See Recordkeeping, later.conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses areing away from your tax home, you can determine not deductible.what travel expenses are deductible. Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental
Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A expensesº means:You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex- single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct thepenses you have when you travel away from • Fees and tips given to porters, baggagetotal cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,home on business. The type of expense you can carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsbut only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he usesdeduct depends on the facts and your circum- or stewardesses and others on ships, andpublic transportation, he can deduct only hisstances. hotel servants in foreign countries,fare.Table 26-1 , later, summarizes travel ex- • Transportation between places of lodgingpenses you may be able to deduct. You may or business and places where meals areMeals and Incidental Expenseshave other deductible travel expenses that are taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atnot covered there, depending on the facts and You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the the temporary duty site, andyour circumstances. following situations. • Mailing costs associated with filing travelWhen you travel away from home on • It is necessary for you to stop for substan- vouchers and payment of em-business, you should keep records of tial sleep or rest to properly perform your ployer-sponsored charge card billings.all the expenses you have and any
RECORDS duties while traveling away from home onadvances you receive from your employer. You Incidental expenses do not include expenses forbusiness.can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-
• The meal is business-related entertain-written record to keep track of your expenses. ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone
ment.The types of expenses you need to record, calls.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

Page 178 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incidental expenses only method. You If you travel to more than one location in one Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at
day, use the rate in effect for the area where youcan use an optional method (instead of actual 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount
stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-cost) for deducting incidental expenses only. to cover her expenses and included it with her
tation industry, however, see Special rate forThe amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You wages.
transportation workers, later.can use this method only if you did not pay or Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of
incur any meal expenses. You cannot use this the standard meal allowance for Washington,Standard meal allowance for areas outsidemethod on any day that you use the standard DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andthe continental United States.  The standardmeal allowance. Friday (the days she departed and returned),meal allowance rates above do not apply to
and the full daily rate for Thursday.travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locationFederal employees should refer to the
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anyoutside the continental United States. The De-Federal Travel Regulations at 
method that she applies consistently and that ispartment of Defense establishes per diem rateswww.gsa.gov. Find ªWhat GSA Offersº
CAUTION
!
for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa- in accordance with reasonable business prac-and click on ªRegulations: FAR, FMR, FTRº for
moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is- tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theFederal Travel Regulation (FTR) for changes
lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and standard meal allowance even though a federalaffecting claims for reimbursement.
other non-foreign areas outside the continental employee would have to use method 1 and be
50% limit may apply. If you use the stan- United States. The Department of State estab- limited to only 21/2 days.
dard meal allowance method for meal expenses lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.
and you are not reimbursed or you are reim- You can access per diem rates for Travel in thebursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can non-foreign areas outside the conti-generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal United Statesnental United States at:
allowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac- www.defensetravel.dod.mil/perdiem/countable plan and you are deducting amounts The following discussion applies to travel in theperdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-that are more than your reimbursements, you United States. For this purpose, the Unitedeign per diem rates at:can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. The States includes the 50 states and the District ofwww.state.gov/travel/ . Click on ªTravel Per50% limit is explained later under Entertainment Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-Diem Allowances for Foreign Areasº under ªFor-Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountable penses depends on how much of your trip waseign Per Diem Rates,º to obtain the latest foreignplans are discussed later under Reimburse- business related and on how much of your tripper diem rates.ments. occurred within the United States. See Part of
Trip Outside the United States, later.Special rate for transportation workers.There is no optional standard lodging
You can use a special standard meal allowanceamount similar to the standard meal
if you work in the transportation industry. Youallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
!
Trip Primarily for Businessare in the transportation industry if your work:pense deduction is your actual cost.
• Directly involves moving people or goods You can deduct all your travel expenses if yourWho can use the standard meal allowance. by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or trip was entirely business related. If your trip wasYou can use the standard meal allowance truck, and primarily for business and, while at your busi-whether you are an employee or self-employed,
ness destination, you extended your stay for aand whether or not you are reimbursed for your • Regularly requires you to travel away from
vacation, made a personal side trip, or had othertraveling expenses. home and, during any single trip, usually
personal activities, you can deduct your busi-involves travel to areas eligible for differ-
Use of the standard meal allowance for other ness-related travel expenses. These expensesent standard meal allowance rates.
travel. You can use the standard meal allow- include the travel costs of getting to and fromIf this applies to you, you can claim a standardance to figure your meal expenses when you your business destination and any busi-meal allowance of $59 a day ($65 for traveltravel in connection with investment and other ness-related expenses at your business desti-outside the continental United States).income-producing property. You can also use it nation.
to figure your meal expenses when you travel for Using the special rate for transportation work-
qualifying educational purposes. You cannot Example. You work in Atlanta and take aers eliminates the need for you to determine the
use the standard meal allowance to figure the business trip to New Orleans in May. On yourstandard meal allowance for every area where
cost of your meals when you travel for medical way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your par-you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use
or charitable purposes. ents. You spend $1,999 for the 9 days you arethe special rate for any trip, you must use the
away from home for travel, meals, lodging, andspecial rate (and not use the regular standard
Amount of standard meal allowance. The other travel expenses. If you had not stopped inmeal allowance rates) for all trips you take that
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE year. Mobile, you would have been gone only 6 days,
rate. For travel in 2010, the rate for most small and your total cost would have been $1,699.
localities in the United States is $46 a day. Travel for days you depart and return. For You can deduct $1,699 for your trip, including
Most major cities and many other localities in both the day you depart for and the day you the cost of round-trip transportation to and from
the United States are designated as high-cost return from a business trip, you must prorate the New Orleans. The deduction for your meals is
areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- standard meal allowance (figure a reduced subject to the 50% limit on meals mentioned
lowances. Locations qualifying for these rates amount for each day). You can do so by one of earlier.
are listed in Publication 1542 which is available two methods.
on the Internet at IRS.gov. • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-
Trip Primarily forYou can also find this information (or- dard meal allowance.
Personal Reasonsganized by state) on the Internet at • Method 2: You can prorate using anywww.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem
 method that you consistently apply and If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,Rates,º then select ª2010º for the period January that is in accordance with reasonable busi- such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a1, 2010 ± September 30, 2010, and select ness practice. nondeductible personal expense. However, youª2011º for the period October 1, 2010 ± Decem-
can deduct any expenses you have while at yourber 31, 2010. However, you can apply the rates
destination that are directly related to your busi-in effect before October 1, 2010, for expenses of Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans
ness.all travel within the United States for 2010 in- as a convention planner. In March, her employer
   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may bestead of the updated rates. You must consist- sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to
a vacation even if the promoter advertises that itently use either the rates for the first 9 months attend a planning seminar. She left her home in
is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-for all of 2010 or the updated rates for the period New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and
dental business activities during a trip, such asof October 1, 2010, through December 31, arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
2010. viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingspending two nights there, she flew back to New
Page 176 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 179 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with general subjects, will not change what is Travel entirely for business. If you travel nonbusiness activities to determine your de-
really a vacation into a business trip. ductible amount. These travel allocation rulesoutside the United States and you spend the
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463.entire time on business activities, you can de-
duct all of your travel expenses. You do not have to allocate your travelPart of Trip Outside expense deduction if you meet one of
the United States Travel considered entirely for business. the four exceptions listed earlier under
TIP
Even if you did not spend your entire time on Travel considered entirely for business. In thoseIf part of your trip is outside the United States, business activities, your trip is considered en- cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting touse the rules described later under Travel tirely for business if you meet at least one of the and from your destination.Outside the United States for that part of the trip. following four exceptions.For the part of your trip that is inside the United
Exception 1 - No substantial control.States, use the rules for travel in the United
Travel Primarily for PersonalYour trip is considered entirely for business ifStates. Travel outside the United States does
Reasonsnot include travel from one point in the United you did not have substantial control over arrang-
States to another point in the United States. The ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
If you travel outside the United States primarilyfollowing discussion can help you determine your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-whether your trip was entirely within the United substantial control over arranging your trip. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalStates. You do not have substantial control over expense. If you spend some time attending briefyour trip if you:Public transportation. If you travel by public professional seminars or a continuing education
transportation, any place in the United States program, you can deduct your registration fees• Are an employee who was reimbursed or
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a and other expenses you have that are directlypaid a travel expense allowance,
point in the United States. Once the vehicle related to your business.• Are not related to your employer, andleaves the last scheduled stop in the United
States on its way to a point outside the United • Are not a managing executive. ConventionsStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
the United States. ªRelated to your employerº is defined later in You can deduct your travel expenses when you
this chapter under Per Diem and Car Al- attend a convention if you can show that yourExample. You fly from New York to Puerto lowances. attendance benefits your trade or business. YouRico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-A ªmanaging executiveº is an employee whoto New York nonstop. The flight from New York ily.has the authority and responsibility, without be-to Miami is in the United States, so only the flight  If the convention is for investment, political,ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onfrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United social, or other purposes unrelated to your tradethe need for the business travel.States. Because there are no scheduled stops or business, you cannot deduct the expenses. A self-employed person generally has sub-between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
stantial control over arranging business trips.return trip is outside the United States. Your appointment or election as a dele-
gate does not, in itself, determineException 2 - Outside United States noPrivate car. Travel by private car in the United whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
!more than a week. Your trip is consideredStates is travel between points in the United penses. You can deduct your travel expensesentirely for business if you were outside theStates, even when you are on your way to a only if your attendance is connected to your ownUnited States for a week or less, combiningdestination outside the United States. trade or business.business and nonbusiness activities. One week
means 7 consecutive days. In counting theExample. You travel by car from Denver to Convention agenda. The convention agendaMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver days, do not count the day you leave the United or program generally shows the purpose of theto the border and from the border back to Den- States, but do count the day you return to the convention. You can show your attendance atver is travel in the United States, and the rules in United States. the convention benefits your trade or businessthis section apply. The rules under Travel Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on by comparing the agenda with the official dutiesOutside the United States apply to your trip from personal activities. Your trip is considered and responsibilities of your position. The agendathe border to Mexico City and back to the border. entirely for business if: does not have to deal specifically with your offi-
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough• You were outside the United States forTravel Outside if the agenda is so related to your position that itmore than a week, and shows your attendance was for business pur-the United States • You spent less than 25% of the total time poses.
you were outside the United States onIf any part of your business travel is outside the
Conventions held outside the North Ameri-nonbusiness activities.United States, some of your deductions for the
can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 forcost of getting to and from your destination may For this purpose, count both the day your trip information on conventions held outside thebe limited. For this purpose, the United States began and the day it ended. North American area.includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-bia.
eration. Your trip is considered entirely forHow much of your travel expenses you can
business if you can establish that a personaldeduct depends in part upon how much of your
trip outside the United States was business re- vacation was not a major consideration, even if Entertainment
lated. you have substantial control over arranging the
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa- trip. Expenses
tion on luxury water travel.
You may be able to deduct business-related
Travel Primarily for Business entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
Travel Entirely for Business ing a client, customer, or employee.
If you travel outside the United States primarily You can deduct entertainment expensesor Considered Entirely
for business but spend some of your time on only if they are both ordinary and necessaryfor Business nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de- (defined earlier in the Introduction) and meet
duct all of your travel expenses. You can onlyYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- one of the following tests.
deduct the business portion of your cost of get-ting to and from your business destination if your • Directly-related test.ting to and from your destination. You musttrip is entirely for business or considered entirely
allocate the costs between your business andfor business. • Associated test.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

Page 180 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 of Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi- limit on expenses for which your employer reim-
Publication 463. burses you under an accountable plan. Account-ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
able plans are discussed later underallowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
The amount you can deduct for enter- Reimbursements.the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
tainment expenses may be limited. Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (.50 ×
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
! $90). Individuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. its. You can deduct a higher percentage ofThis limit is discussed next. Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a your meal expenses while traveling away from
concert and give them to a client. You pur- your tax home if the meals take place during or
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You50% Limit incident to any period subject to the Department
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction percentage is 80%.
business-related meal and entertainment ex- cannot be more than $80 (.50 ×  $160). Individuals subject to the Department ofpenses. (If you are subject to the Department of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits includeTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you the following persons.can deduct 80% of your business-related meal Exceptions to the 50% Limit
and entertainment expenses. See Individuals • Certain air transportation workers (such as
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-subject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.) pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.The 50% limit applies to employees or their control tower operators) who are under
Figure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%employers, and to self-employed persons (in- Federal Aviation Administration regula-
cluding independent contractors) or their clients, tions.limit applies to you.
depending on whether the expenses are reim- Your meal or entertainment expense is not • Interstate truck operators and bus driversbursed. subject to the 50% limit if the expense meets who are under Department of Transporta-Figure 26-A  summarizes the general rules one of the following exceptions. tion regulations.explained in this section.
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-The 50% limit applies to business meals or
Employee's reimbursed expenses. If you neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-entertainment expenses you have while:
are an employee, you are not subject to the 50% ers, and control operations personnel)• Traveling away from home (whether eat-
ing alone or with others) on business,
• Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location,
or
• Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-
eon at a club.
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the
50% limit include:
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity,
• Cover charges for admission to a night-
club,
• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
dinner or cocktail party, and
• Amounts paid for parking at a sports
arena.
However, the cost of transportation to and from
a business meal or a business-related entertain-
ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on
meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later in
this section.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal
and entertainment expenses that are not busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain-
ment expenses incurred for the production of
income, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this chapter.
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report. )
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- boards, trade associations, and professional as- Additional information. For more information
tration regulations. on entertainment expenses, including discus-sociations.
sions of the directly-related and associated• Certain merchant mariners who are under tests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463.Coast Guard regulations. Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. ForOther exceptions. There are also exceptions
example, you cannot deduct service fees youfor the self-employed, advertising expenses, Gift Expensespay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amountselling meals or entertainment, and charitable
over the face value of the tickets you pay tosports events. These are discussed in Publica- If you give gifts in the course of your trade orscalpers.tion 463. business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
This section explains the limits and rules for
What Entertainment deducting the costs of gifts.What Entertainment
Expenses Are Not $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25Expenses Are Deductible?
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly toDeductible?This section explains different types of entertain- each person during your tax year. A gift to a
ment expenses you may be able to deduct. company that is intended for the eventual per-This section explains different types of entertain-
sonal use or benefit of a particular person or ament expenses you generally may not be able toEntertainment.  Entertainment includes any limited class of people will be considered andeduct.activity generally considered to provide enter- indirect gift to that particular person or to thetainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples individuals within that class of people who re-include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- Club dues and membership fees. You can- ceive the gift.cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for If you give a gift to a member of a customer'ssporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- membership in any club organized for: family, the gift is generally considered to be aning, vacation, and similar trips. indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not• Business, apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-
• Pleasure, ness connection with that family member andtainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
the gift is not intended for the customer's even-to a customer or client, whether the meal is a • Recreation, or tual use.part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
• Other social purpose. If you and your spouse both give gifts, both ofexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does nottaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter- This rule applies to any membership organiza- matter whether you have separate businesses,tainment-related meal, you or your employee tion if one of its principal purposes is either: are separately employed, or whether each ofmust be present when the food or beverages are
you has an independent connection with the• To conduct entertainment activities forprovided.
recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-members or their guests, orYou cannot claim the cost of your meal ship and the partners are treated as one tax-• To provide members or their guests withboth as an entertainment expense and payer.access to entertainment facilities.as a travel expense.
CAUTION
!
Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,The purposes and activities of a club, not itsSeparating costs. If you have one expense
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-name, will determine whether or not you canthat includes the costs of entertainment and
mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paidother services (such as lodging or transporta-
limit.to:tion), you must allocate that expense between
A cost is incidental only if it does not addthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other • Country clubs, substantial value to the gift. For example, theservices. You must have a reasonable basis for
cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-• Golf and athletic clubs,making this allocation. For example, you must
ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket forallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter- • Airline clubs, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if thetainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
value of the basket is substantial compared to• Hotel clubs, androom charge.
the value of the fruit.• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- Exceptions. The following items are not con-cumstances generally considered to bement. If a group of business acquaintances sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. conducive to business discussions.take turns picking up each others' meal or enter-
tainment checks without regard to whether any 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
business purposes are served, no member of Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can-
a. Has your name clearly and permanentlythe group can deduct any part of the expense. not deduct any expense for the use of an enter-
imprinted on the gift, andtainment facility. This includes expenses forLavish or extravagant expenses. You can- depreciation and operating costs such as rent, b. Is one of a number of identical itemsnot deduct expenses for entertainment that are utilities, maintenance, and protection. you widely distribute. Examples includelavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-
pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andAn entertainment facility is any property youered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable
cases.own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examplesconsidering the facts and circumstances. Ex-
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp,penses will not be disallowed just because they
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionalswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
material to be used on the business prem-airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in aplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,
ises of the recipient.or resorts. vacation resort.
Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deductTrade association meetings.  You can de- Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be
out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food andduct entertainment expenses that are directly considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, thatrelated to, and necessary for, attending busi- ally will be considered entertainment. However,
you provided during entertainment at a facility.ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
These are not expenses for the use of an enter-organizations if the expenses of your attend- ages you intend the customer to use at a later
tainment facility. However, these expenses areance are related to your active trade or busi- date, treat it as a gift.
subject to the directly-related and associatedness. These organizations include business  If you give a customer tickets to a theater
tests and to the 50% limit discussed earlier.leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate performance or sporting event and you do not go
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
car expense deduction. See Car Expenses ,
later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure 26-B  illustrates the rules for when you
can deduct transportation expenses when you
have a regular or main job away from your
home. You may want to refer to it when deciding
whether you can deduct your transportation ex-
penses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed earlier in this chapter.
No regular place of work. If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
itan area.
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home.)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs thatwith the customer to the performance or event, Transportation expenses include the ordi- are considered part of that metropolitan area.nary and necessary costs of all of the following.you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the You cannot deduct daily transportation coststickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- • Getting from one workplace to another in between your home and temporary work sitesment expense, whichever is to your advantage. the course of your business or profession within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
If you go with the customer to the event, you when you are traveling within the area of ductible commuting expenses.
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- your tax home. (Tax home is defined ear- Two places of work. If you work at two placesment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, lier under Travel Expenses.) in one day, whether or not for the same em-to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. • Visiting clients or customers. ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for• Going to a business meeting away from some personal reason you do not go directlyyour regular workplace. from one location to the other, you cannot de-
• Getting from your home to a temporary duct more than the amount it would have costTransportation
workplace when you have one or more you to go directly from the first location to the
regular places of work. These temporary second.Expenses
workplaces can be either within the area Transportation expenses you have in going
of your tax home or outside that area. between home and a part-time job on a day offThis section discusses expenses you can de-
from your main job are commuting expenses.duct for business transportation when you are Transportation expenses do not include ex- You cannot deduct them.not traveling away from home as defined earlier penses you have while traveling away from
under Travel Expenses . These expenses in- home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex- Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an
clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus, penses, discussed earlier. However, if you use Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintaining your car while traveling away from home over- business if the meeting is held on a day on which
your car. night, use the rules in this section to figure your you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expense of getting from one workplace to the instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow have to use it in your business to qualify for the
with your car). credit. For more information, see chapter 37.other as just discussed under Two places of
work. Union members' trips from a union hall. If Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mailYou usually cannot deduct the expense if the you get your work assignments at a union hall carrier, you may be able to treat the amount ofreserve meeting is held on a day on which you and then go to your place of work, the costs of qualified reimbursement you received as thedo not work at your regular job. In this case, your getting from the union hall to your place of work amount of your allowable expense. Because thetransportation generally is a nondeductible com- are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- qualified reimbursement is treated as paid undermuting expense. However, you can deduct your though you need the union to get your work an accountable plan, your employer should nottransportation expenses if the location of the assignments, you are employed where you include the amount of reimbursement in yourmeeting is temporary and you have one or more work, not where the union hall is located. income.regular places of work. If your vehicle expenses are more than theOffice in the home. If you have an office inIf you ordinarily work in a particular metropol- amount of your reimbursement, you can deductyour home that qualifies as a principal place ofitan area but not at any specific location and the the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-business, you can deduct your daily transporta-reserve meeting is held at a temporary location duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You musttion costs between your home and another workoutside that metropolitan area, you can deduct complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Formlocation in the same trade or business. (Seeyour transportation expenses. 1040.chapter 28 for information on determining if yourIf you travel away from home overnight to A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-home office qualifies as a principal place ofattend a guard or reserve meeting, you can bursement you receive that meets both of thebusiness.)deduct your travel expenses. These expenses following conditions.
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses. Examples of deductible transportation. The • It is given as an equipment maintenanceIf you travel more than 100 miles away from following examples show when you can deduct allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.home in connection with your performance of transportation expenses based on the location Postal Service.services as a member of the reserves, you may of your work and your home.be able to deduct some of your reserve-related • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
travel costs as an adjustment to income rather lective bargaining agreement. Any laterExample 1. You regularly work in an officethan as an itemized deduction. See Armed agreement cannot increase the qualifiedin the city where you live. Your employer sendsForces reservists traveling more than 100 miles reimbursement amount by more than theyou to a 1-week training session at a differentfrom home under Special Rules, later. rate of inflation.office in the same city. You travel directly from
your home to the training location and return See your employer for information on your reim-Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily bursement.the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, round-trip transportation between your home
or of driving a car between your home and your and the training location. If you are a rural mail carrier and re-main or regular place of work. These costs are ceived a qualified reimbursement, youpersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de- Example 2. Your principal place of business cannot use the standard mileage rate.
CAUTION
!duct commuting expenses no matter how far is in your home. You can deduct the cost of
your home is from your regular place of work. round-trip transportation between your qualify-
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if ing home office and your client's or customer's Standard Mileage Rateyou work during the commuting trip. place of business.
You may be able to use the standard mileageExample. You sometimes use your cell Example 3. You have no regular office, and rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingphone to make business calls while commuting you do not have an office in your home. In this your car for business purposes. For 2010, theto and from work. Sometimes business associ- case, the location of your first business contact standard mileage rate for each mile of businessates ride with you to and from work, and you is considered your office. Transportation ex- use is 50 cents per mile.have a business discussion in the car. These penses between your home and this first contact
activities do not change the trip from personal to If you use the standard mileage rate forare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-
business. You cannot deduct your commuting a year, you cannot deduct your actualportation expenses between your last business
expenses. car expenses for that year, but seecontact and your home are also nondeductible
CAUTION
!
Parking fees and tolls, later.commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
duct the costs of these first and last trips, you You generally can use the standard mileageat your place of business are nondeductible
can deduct the costs of going from one client or rate whether or not you are reimbursed andcommuting expenses. You can, however, de-
customer to another. whether or not any reimbursement is more orduct business-related parking fees when visiting
less than the amount figured using the standarda customer or client.
mileage rate. See Reimbursements under HowCar ExpensesAdvertising display on car. Putting display To Report, later.material that advertises your business on your If you use your car for business purposes, youcar does not change the use of your car from Choosing the standard mileage rate. If youmay be able to deduct car expenses. You gener-personal use to business use. If you use this car want to use the standard mileage rate for a carally can use one of the two following methods tofor commuting or other personal uses, you still you own, you must choose to use it in the firstfigure your deductible expenses.cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. year the car is available for use in your business.
Then in later years, you can choose to use either• Standard mileage rate.Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not • Actual car expenses. If you want to use the standard mileage rateinclude payments you receive from the passen- for a car you lease, you must use it for the entiregers in your income. These payments are con- If you use actual car expenses to figure your lease period. For leases that began on or beforesidered reimbursements of your expenses. deduction for a car you lease, there are rules December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit, that affect the amount of your lease payments must be used for the entire portion of the leaseyou must include payments from passengers in you can deduct. See Leasing a car under Actual period (including renewals) that is after 1997.your income. You can then deduct your car Car Expenses, later. You must make the choice to use the stan-expenses (using the rules in this chapter). In this chapter, ªcarº includes a van, pickup, dard mileage rate by the due date (includingor panel truck.Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke
tools or instruments in your car while commuting You may be entitled to a tax credit for the choice. However, in a later year, you can
to and from work does not make your car ex- an alternative motor vehicle you place switch from the standard mileage rate to the
penses deductible. However, you can deduct in service during the year. The vehicle actual expenses method. If you change to the
TIP
any additional costs you have for hauling tools or must meet certain requirements, and you do not actual expense method in a later year, but
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gas Licenses Repairsbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to standard mileage rate or actual expenses to
Insurance Oil Tiresestimate the remaining useful life of the car and figure your deductible car expense.
Parking fees Tollsuse straight line depreciation. Deductible payments. If you choose to use
actual expenses, you can deduct the part ofExample. Larry is an employee who occa- Business and personal use. If you use your each lease payment that is for the use of thesionally uses his own car for business purposes. car for both business and personal purposes, vehicle in your business. You cannot deduct anyHe purchased the car in 2008, but he did not you must divide your expenses between busi- part of a lease payment that is for personal useclaim any unreimbursed employee expenses on ness and personal use. You can divide your of the vehicle, such as commuting.his 2008 tax return. Because Larry did not use expense based on the miles driven for eachthe standard mileage rate the first year the car You must spread any advance paymentspurpose.was available for business use, he cannot use over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
the standard mileage rate in 2010 to claim un- Example. You are a contractor and drive any payments you make to buy a vehicle, even ifreimbursed employee business expenses. your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 the payments are called lease payments.For more information about depreciation in- miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per- If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days orcluded in the standard mileage rate, see the sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ more, you may have to reduce your lease pay-exception in Methods of depreciation under De- 20,000) of the cost of operating your car as a ment deduction by an ªinclusion amount.º Forpreciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Publication business expense. information on reporting lease inclusion463.
amounts, see Leasing a Car in chapter 4 ofInterest on car loans. If you are an employee,
Publication 463.you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carStandard mileage rate not allowed. You
loan. This interest is treated as personal interestcannot use the standard mileage rate if you:
and is not deductible. However, if you are
Sale, Trade-In, or Other Disposition• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), self-employed and use your car in that business,
see chapter 4 of Publication 535.• Use five or more cars at the same time (as If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your
in fleet operations), If you use a home equity loan to car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductible
purchase your car, you may be able to loss. This is true whether you used the standard• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the
deduct the interest. See chapter 23 for
TIP mileage rate or actual car expenses to deductcar using any method other than straight
more information.line depreciation, the business use of your car. Publication 544
has information on sales of property used in a• Claimed a section 179 deduction on the Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em- trade or business, and details on how to reportcar, ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes the disposition.
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter• Claimed the special depreciation allow-
the amount paid on line 8 of Schedule A (Formance on the car,
1040). (See chapter 22 for more information on• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 taxes.) If you are not an employee, see yourfor a car you leased, or Recordkeepingform instructions for information on how to de-
duct personal property taxes paid on your car.• Are a rural mail carrier who received a
If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your portation expenses, you must be able to provecarriers, earlier.) car are part of your car's basis and are recov- (substantiate) certain elements of the expense.ered through depreciation, discussed later.Five or more cars. If you own or lease five This section discusses the records you need to
At the time this publication went toor more cars that are used for business at the keep to prove these expenses.
print, Congress was considering legis-same time, you cannot use the standard mile- If you keep timely and accurate rec-lation that would extend the deductionage rate for the business use of any car. How-
CAUTION
! ords, you will have support to show thefor general sales taxes on the nonbusiness useever, you may be able to deduct your actual IRS if your tax return is ever examined.
RECORDSof your car through 2010. To find out if thisexpenses for operating each of the cars in your You will also have proof of expenses that yourlegislation was enacted, and for more details, gobusiness. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4 employer may require if you are reimbursedto www.irs.gov/formspubs.of Publication 463 for information on how to
under an accountable plan. These plans arefigure your deduction.
discussed later under Reimbursements.You are not using five or more cars for busi- Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines
ness at the same time if you alternate using (use you pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola-
at different times) the cars for business. tions. How To Prove Expenses
Depreciation and section 179 deductions. Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need toParking fees and tolls. In addition to using Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and prove each expense discussed in this chapter.the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any improvements, is a capital expense. Because You must be able to prove the elements listedbusiness-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener- across the top portion of the chart. You provefees you pay to park your car at your place of ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However, them by having the information and receiptswork are nondeductible commuting expenses.) you can recover this cost through the section (where needed) for the expenses listed in the179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section first column.179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de-Actual Car Expenses preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- You cannot deduct amounts that you
tions. Depreciation allows you to recover the approximate or estimate.If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you cost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it
CAUTION
!may be able to deduct your actual car expenses. each year. The section 179 deduction, special
If you qualify to use both methods, you depreciation allowance, and the depreciation You should keep adequate records to provemay want to figure your deduction both deduction are discussed in more detail in chap- your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatways to see which gives you a larger ter 4 of Publication 463.
TIP will support your own statement. You must gen-deduction. Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-tions. Special rules apply if you use your car
ered adequate. This is because written evidence50% or less in your work or business.Actual car expenses include:
is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
ever, if you prepare a record on a computer it isLeasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or vanDepreciation Lease Registration
considered an adequate record.Garage rent payments fees that you use in your business, you can use the
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or near the time of the expense or use and expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneWhat Are Adequate Records?
support it with sufficient documentary evidence. calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals
You should keep the proof you need in an ac- A timely-kept record has more value than a should be in a separate category. You can in-
count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim- statement prepared later when generally there is clude tips for meal-related services with the
ilar record. You should also keep documentary a lack of accurate recall. costs of the meals.
evidence that, together with your records, will You do not need to write down the elements Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-support each element of an expense. of every expense on the day of the expense. If ing the course of a single event are considered a
you maintain a log on a weekly basis which single expense. For example, if during entertain-Documentary evidence. You generally must accounts for use during the week, the log is ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forhave documentary evidence, such as receipts, considered a timely-kept record. each serving of refreshments, the total expensecanceled checks, or bills, to support your ex- If you give your employer, client, or customer for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-penses. an expense account statement, it can also be pense.
Exception. Documentary evidence is not considered a timely-kept record. This is true if
needed if any of the following conditions apply. you copy it from your account book, diary, state-
Allocating total cost. If you can prove thement of expense, or similar record.• You have meals or lodging expenses total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-while traveling away from home for which not prove how much it cost for each person whoProving business purpose. You must gener-you account to your employer under an participated in the event, you may have to allo-ally provide a written statement of the businessaccountable plan and you use a per diem cate the total cost among you and your guestspurpose of an expense. However, the degree ofallowance method that includes meals on a pro rata basis. An allocation would beproof varies according to the circumstances inand/or lodging. (Accountable plans and each case. If the business purpose of an ex- needed, for example, if you did not have a busi-per diem allowances are discussed later pense is clear from the surrounding circum- ness relationship with all of your guests.under Reimbursements.) stances, then you do not need to give a written
• Your expense, other than lodging, is less explanation. If your return is examined. If your return isthan $75.
examined, you may have to provide additionalConfidential information. You do not need to• You have a transportation expense for information to the IRS. This information could beput confidential information relating to an ele-which a receipt is not readily available. needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy orment of a deductible expense (such as the
reliability of information contained in your rec-place, business purpose, or business relation-Adequate evidence. Documentary evi- ords, statements, testimony, or documentaryship) in your account book, diary, or other re-dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it evidence before a deduction is allowed.cord. However, you do have to record theshows the amount, date, place, and essential information elsewhere at or near the time of thecharacter of the expense. expense and have it available to fully prove that How Long To KeepFor example, a hotel receipt is enough to element of the expense. support expenses for business travel if it has all Records and Receipts
of the following information.
You must keep records as long as they may be• The name and location of the hotel. What if I Have Incomplete needed for the administration of any provision ofRecords?• The dates you stayed there. the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
means you must keep your records that support• Separate amounts for charges such as If you do not have complete records to prove an
your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 yearslodging, meals, and telephone calls. element of an expense, then you must prove the
from the date you file the income tax return onelement with:
which the deduction is claimed. A return filedA restaurant receipt is enough to prove an • Your own written or oral statement, con- early is considered filed on the due date. For aexpense for a business meal if it has all of the taining specific information about the ele- more complete explanation, see Publicationfollowing information. ment, and 583, Starting a Business and Keeping Records.• The name and location of the restaurant. • Other supporting evidence that is sufficient
• The number of people served. to establish the element. Reimbursed for expenses. Employees who
• The date and amount of the expense. give their records and documentation to their
Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a employers and are reimbursed for their ex-If a charge is made for items other than food and receipt because of reasons beyond your control, penses generally do not have to keep copies ofbeverages, the receipt must show that this is the you can prove a deduction by reconstructing this information. However, you may have tocase. your records or expenses. Reasons beyond prove your expenses if any of the following con-
Canceled check. A canceled check, to- your control include fire, flood, and other casu- ditions apply.
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- alty. • You claim deductions for expenses thattablishes the cost. However, a canceled check
are more than reimbursements.by itself does not prove a business expense
without other evidence to show that it was for a Separating and Combining • Your expenses are reimbursed under a
business purpose. Expenses nonaccountable plan.
• Your employer does not use adequate ac-Duplicate information. You do not have to This section explains when expenses must be
counting procedures to verify expense ac-record information in your account book or other kept separate and when expenses can be com-
counts.record that duplicates information shown on a bined.
receipt as long as your records and receipts • You are related to your employer, as de-complement each other in an orderly manner. Separating expenses. Each separate pay- fined later under Related to employer.
You do not have to record amounts your ment is generally considered a separate ex-
employer pays directly for any ticket or other pense. For example, if you entertain a customer See the next section, How To Report , for a
travel item. However, if you charge these items or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-to your employer, through a credit card or other- dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick- counting, and nonaccountable plans.wise, you must keep a record of the amounts ets are two separate expenses. You must record
you spend. them separately in your records.
Additional information. Chapter 5 of Publi-
cation 463 has more information on recordkeep-Timely-kept records. You should record the Combining items. You can make one daily
ing, including examples.elements of an expense or of a business use at entry in your record for reasonable categories of
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose and IF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, fees and tips, etc. business.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may be Business Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the business discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your rules for certain individuals (such as performingHow To Report business expenses for your work as an em- artists) discussed later under Special Rules do
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orThis section explains where and how to report next. 2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de-the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
ductible gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule Acusses reimbursements and how to treat them Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- (Form 1040).under accountable and nonaccountable plans. It erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
also explains rules for independent contractors travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- Statutory employees.   If you received aand clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform- penses. However, you can use the shorter Form Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box ining artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certain 2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all of box 13 was checked, report your income anddisabled employees. This section ends with an the following conditions. expenses related to that income on Schedule Cillustration of how to report travel, entertainment, or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form• You are an employee deducting expensesgift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ. 2106 or 2106-EZ.attributable to your job.
Self-employed. You must report your income Statutory employees include full-time life in-• You were not reimbursed by your em-and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-ployer for your expenses (amounts in-1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certaincluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not homeworkers.considered reimbursements).use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in-
If you are entitled to a reimbursementstructions for information on how to complete • If you claim car expenses, you use the from your employer but you do notyour tax return. You can also find information in standard mileage rate. claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in
for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, if you are For more information on how to report your bursement applies.a farmer. expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.Both self-employed and an employee.   If
Reimbursement for personal expenses. Ifyou are both self-employed and an employee, Gifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse-
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-you must keep separate records for each busi- ments (or the reimbursements were all included
ible personal expenses, such as for vacationness activity. Report your business expenses for in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business
Page 184 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 187 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
trips, your employer must report the reimburse- business-related expenses that you adequately and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form accounted for to your employer. ments to the employer.
W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. The definition of a reasonable period of time
depends on the facts and circumstances of your
situation. However, regardless of the facts and Adequate AccountingReimbursements circumstances of your situation, actions that
take place within the times specified in the fol- One of the rules for an accountable plan is thatThis section explains what to do when you re- lowing list will be treated as taking place within a you must adequately account to your employerceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of reasonable period of time. for your expenses. You adequately account bythe employee business expenses discussed in
giving your employer a statement of expense,this chapter. • You receive an advance within 30 days of
an account book, a diary, or a similar record inIf you received an advance, allowance, or the time you have an expense.
which you entered each expense at or near thereimbursement for your expenses, how you re- • You adequately account for your ex- time you had it, along with documentary evi-port this amount and your expenses depends on penses within 60 days after they were paid dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,whether the reimbursement was paid to you or incurred.under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable and other employee business expenses. (See
plan. Table 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enter• You return any excess reimbursement
This section explains the two types of plans, in your record and documents you need to provewithin 120 days after the expense was
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov- certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowancepaid or incurred.
ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax satisfies the adequate accounting requirement• You are given a periodic statement (attreatment of your reimbursements and ex- under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Carleast quarterly) that asks you to either re-penses. Allowances, later.turn or adequately account for outstanding
You must account for all amounts you re-advances and you comply within 120 daysNo reimbursement. You are not reimbursed ceived from your employer during the year asof the statement.or given an allowance for your expenses if you advances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisare paid a salary or commission with the under- includes amounts you charged to your employerstanding that you will pay your own expenses. In Employee meets accountable plan rules. If by credit card or other method. You must givethis situation, you have no reimbursement or you meet the three rules for accountable plans, your employer the same type of records andallowance arrangement, and you do not have to your employer should not include any reim- supporting information that you would have toread this section on reimbursements. Instead, bursements in your income in box 1 of your give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionsee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later, Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- on your return. You must pay back the amount offor information on completing your tax return. bursement, you do not complete Form 2106. any reimbursement or other expense allowanceYou have no deduction since your expensesReimbursement, allowance, or advance. A for which you do not adequately account or thatand reimbursement are equal.reimbursement or other expense allowance ar- is more than the amount for which you ac-
If your employer included reimburse-rangement is a system or plan that an employer counted.
ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 anduses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
you meet all the rules for accountablepenses, advances, reimbursements, and
TIP
plans, ask your employer for a corrected Formamounts charged to the employer for employee Per Diem and Car Allowances
W-2.business expenses. Arrangements include per
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-diem and car allowances.
penses using a per diem or car allowance, you  A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of Accountable plan rules not met. Even
can generally use the allowance as proof of thedaily reimbursement your employer gives you though you are reimbursed under an accounta-
for your lodging, meal, and incidental expenses amount of your expenses. A per diem or carble plan, some of your expenses may not meet
when you are away from home on business. allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all
(The term ªincidental expensesº is defined ear- three rules for accountable plans are treated as quirements for the amount of your expenses
lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A car having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- only if all the following conditions apply.
allowance is an amount your employer gives able plan (discussed later). • Your employer reasonably limits paymentsyou for the business use of your car. Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- of your expenses to those that are ordi-Your employer should tell you what method penses. You may be reimbursed under your nary and necessary in the conduct of theof reimbursement is used and what records you employer's accountable plan for expenses re- trade or business.must provide. lated to that employer's business, some of which • The allowance is similar in form to and notare deductible as employee business expenses more than the federal rate (discussedand some of which are not deductible. The reim-Accountable Plans later).bursements you receive for the nondeductible
expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable • You prove the time (dates), place, andTo be an accountable plan, your employer's
plans, and they are treated as paid under a business purpose of your expenses toreimbursement or allowance arrangement must
nonaccountable plan. your employer (as explained in Tableinclude all of the following rules.
26-2) within a reasonable period of time.
Example. Your employer's plan reimburses1. Your expenses must have a business con-
• You are not related to your employer (asyou for travel expenses while away from homenection Ð that is, you must have paid or
defined next). If you are related to youron business and also for meals when you workincurred deductible expenses while per-
employer, you must be able to prove yourlate at the office, even though you are not awayforming services as an employee of your
expenses to the IRS even if you have al-from home. The part of the arrangement thatemployer.
ready adequately accounted to your em-reimburses you for the nondeductible meals2. You must adequately account to your em- ployer and returned any excesswhen you work late at the office is treated asployer for these expenses within a reason- reimbursement.paid under a nonaccountable plan.able period of time.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-The employer makes the decision3. You must return any excess reimburse- ance practices are not based on reasonablywhether to reimburse employeesment or allowance within a reasonable pe- accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIPriod of time. ognition of cost differences in different areas forcountable plan. If you are an employee who
per diem amounts), you will not be considered toSee Adequate Accounting  and Returning receives payments under a nonaccountable
have accounted to your employer. In this case,Excess Reimbursements, later. plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-
you must be able to prove your expenses to theAn excess reimbursement or allowance is ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily
IRS.any amount you are paid that is more than the accounting to your employer for the expenses
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Page 188 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Related to employer. You are related to your • Figures the allowance on a basis similar to gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your
employer if: that used in computing your compensa- fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-
tion, such as number of hours worked or ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer
1. Your employer is your brother or sister, miles traveled. chooses to use this method, your employer will
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances- request the necessary records from you.
tor, or lineal descendant, High-low rate. This is a simplified method Reporting your expenses with a per diem orof computing the federal per diem rate for travel2. Your employer is a corporation in which car allowance. If your reimbursement is in thewithin the continental United States. It elimi-you own, directly or indirectly, more than form of an allowance received under an ac-nates the need to keep a current list of the per10% in value of the outstanding stock, or countable plan, the following facts affect yourdiem rate for each city. reporting.3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- Under the high-low method, the per diemduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, • The federal rate.amount for travel during January through Sep-a trust, and your employer. tember of 2010 is $258 (including $65 for M&IE) • Whether the allowance or your actual ex-for certain high-cost locations. All other areasYou may be considered to indirectly own stock, penses were more than the federal rate.have a per diem amount of $163 (including $52for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a
The following discussions explain where to re-for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that
port your expenses depending upon how thewhich gives the areas eligible for the $258 perowns the stock or if a member of your family or
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-diem amount under the high-low method for allyour partner owns the stock.
eral rate.or part of this period.)
The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- Allowance less than or equal to the federalEffective October 1, 2010, the per diemured using any one of the following methods. rate. If your allowance is less than or equal torate for certain high-cost locations de-
the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-creased to $233 (including $65 for
CAUTION
!1. For per diem amounts: cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do notM&IE). The rate for all other locations decreased
need to report the related expenses or the allow-to $160 (including $52 for M&IE). However, ana. The regular federal per diem rate.
ance on your return if your expenses are equalemployer can continue to use the rates de-b. The standard meal allowance. to or less than the allowance.scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re-
 However, if your actual expenses are moremainder of 2010 if those rates and locations arec. The high-low rate.
than your allowance, you can complete Formused consistently during October, November,
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-and December for all employees. Employers2. For car expenses:
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-who did not use the high-low method during the
a. The standard mileage rate. penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thefirst 9 months of 2010 cannot begin to use it
total amount of your expenses and reimburse-before 2011. For more information see Revenueb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). ments for the entire year. If you are using theProcedure 2010-39, which can be found on the
standard meal allowance or the standard mile-Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-42_irb/ar13.
For per diem amounts, use the rate in age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.html. Also see Publication 1542 on the Internet
effect for the area where you stop for at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1542.pdf.
sleep or rest. Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in
TIP
Prorating the standard meal allowance on 2010 for business. Under her employer's ac-
partial days of travel. The standard meal al-Regular federal per diem rate. The regular countable plan, she accounts for the time
lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youfederal per diem rate is the highest amount that (dates), place, and business purpose of each
travel for part of a day, such as on the days youthe federal government will pay to its employees trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance
depart and return, you must prorate the full-dayfor lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or of 40 cents a mile.
M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-meal and incidental expenses only) while they Since Nicole's $5,000 expense computed
ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate orare traveling away from home in a particular under the standard mileage rate (10,000 ×  50
the high-low rate.area. The rates are different for different loca- cents) is more than her $4,000 reimbursement
tions. Your employer should have these rates (10,000 miles ×  40 cents), she itemizes herYou can use either of the following methods
available. (Employers can get Publication 1542 deductions to claim the excess expense. Nicoleto figure the federal M&IE for that day.
on the Internet, which gives the rates in the completes Form 2106 (showing all her ex-
1. Method 1:continental United States for the current year.) penses and reimbursements) and enters $1,000
($5,000 − $4,000) as an itemized deduction.The standard meal allowance. The stan- a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the
dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the Allowance more than the federal rate. Ifstandard meal allowance amount for
federal rate for meals and incidental expenses your allowance is more than the federal rate,that day.
(M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the your employer must include the allowanceb. For the day you return, add 3/4 of theUnited States is $46 a day. Most major cities and amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourstandard meal allowance amount formany other localities qualify for higher rates. Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,the preceding day.The rates for all localities within the continental the excess allowance will be included in box 1 of
United States are listed in Publication 1542. You your Form W-2. You must report this part of your2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-can also find this information on the Internet at allowance as if it were wage income.lowance using any method you consist-www.gsa.gov. If your actual expenses are less than orently apply in accordance with reasonable equal to the federal rate, you do not completeYou receive an allowance only for meals and business practice. Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onincidental expenses when your employer does
your return.one of the following. The standard mileage rate. This is a set However, if your actual expenses are morerate per mile that you can use to compute your• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in than the federal rate, you can complete Formdeductible car expenses. For 2010, the standardkind). 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youmileage rate for the cost of operating your car is• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements50 cents per mile.for the actual cost of your lodging. up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your allowance your employer may use to reimburse be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.lodging. your car expenses. Under this method, your
• Does not have a reasonable belief that employer pays an allowance that includes a Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. In
you had (or will have) lodging expenses, combination of payments covering fixed and va- May his employer sent him to San Diego for 4
such as when you stay with friends or rela- riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel
tives or sleep in the cab of your truck. cover your variable operating costs (such as bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for
Page 186 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 189 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-Table 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-Reimbursements
ter.
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on
vance if your employer provides you with anarrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: *
expense allowance before you actually have the
An accountable plan with: expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-
pected to be no more than your expense. UnderActual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. an accountable plan, you are required to ade-Adequate accounting made and excess quately account to your employer for this ad-returned. vance and to return any excess within a
reasonable period of time.Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount.
If you do not adequately account for or do notAdequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1.
return any excess advance within a reasonableexcess both required but excess not
period of time, the amount you do not accountreturned.
for or return will be treated as having been paidPer diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount. All expenses and under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).federal rate: reimbursements only
Unproven amounts. If you do not proveAdequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses
that you actually traveled on each day for whichreturned. are claimed.
you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-Otherwise, form is not
ing the elements described in Table 26-2), youfiled.
must return this unproved amount of the travel
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount No amount. advance within a reasonable period of time. If
federal rate: as wages in box 1. you do not do this, the unproved amount will be
Adequate accounting and return of The amount up to considered paid under a nonaccountable plan
excess both required but excess not the federal rate is (discussed later).
returned. reported only in box Per diem allowance more than federal rate.12Ðit is not If your employer's accountable plan pays you anreported in box 1. allowance that is higher than the federal rate,
you do not have to return the difference betweenPer diem or mileage allowance exceeds The excess amount All expenses (and
the two rates for the period you can prove busi-the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement
ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form
ference will be reported as wages on your Formrate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only if
W-2. This excess amount is considered paidreported only in box expenses in excess of
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).12Ðit is not the federal rate are
reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise,
Example. Your employer sends you on aform is not required.
5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2010
A nonaccountable plan with: and gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance to
cover your meals and incidental expenses. TheEither adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses.
federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-excess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1.
penses for Phoenix is $71. Your trip lasts only 3
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses. days. Under your employer's accountable plan,
as wages in box 1. you must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-
vance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. days you did travel you do not have to return the
$27 difference between the allowance you re-
ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 −his meals and incidental expenses. The federal After he figures the 50% limit on his un- $71) ×  3 days). However, the $27 will be re-rate for San Diego is $71 a day. reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will ported on your Form W-2 as wages.include the balance, $48, as an itemized deduc-Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan
will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to San Nonaccountable PlansDiego, so Joe does not give his employer the Returning Excessrecords that prove that he actually spent $380. A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
ReimbursementsHowever, he does account for the time, place, expense allowance arrangement that does not
and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's meet one or more of the three rules listed earlierUnder an accountable plan, you are required toonly business trip this year. under Accountable Plans.return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days), In addition, even if your employer has anpense allowances for your business expenses
which is $16 more than the federal rate of $284 accountable plan, the following payments will beto the person paying the reimbursement or al-
($71 ×  4 days). His employer includes the $16 as treated as being paid under a nonaccountablelowance. Excess reimbursement means any
income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. His em- plan.amount for which you did not adequately ac-
ployer also enters $284 in box 12 of Joe's Form count within a reasonable period of time. For • Excess reimbursements you fail to returnW-2. example, if you received a travel advance and to your employer.you did not spend all the money on busi-Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
ness-related expenses or you do not have proof • Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-ductible expenses. He enters the total of his
of all your expenses, you have an excess reim- penses related to your employer's busi-actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form
bursement. ness. See Reimbursement of2106. He also enters the reimbursements that
nondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-were not included in his income ($284). His total
countable Plans.deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is $96.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Page 190 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or Transportation expenses. Show your trans- not clearly show how much of the $7,000 was for
portation expenses that did not involve overnight the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-expense allowance arrangement is an account-
travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 forable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 forployer.
line business expenses you have for parking car expenses).
Reporting your expenses under a nonac- fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
countable plan. Your employer will combine ating your car or expenses of commuting be- tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the payment
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- tween your home and work. goes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac- allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses theEmployee business expenses other thancountable plan with your wages, salary, or other worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.meals and entertainment. Show your otherpay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 His completed worksheet follows.employee business expenses on Form 2106,of your Form W-2. lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines Reimbursement Allocation  You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ 3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and Worksheetand itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- (keep for your records)penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-tertainment. Your meal and entertainment tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses, 1. Enter the total amount ofexpenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- and trade and professional publications. reimbursements your employer gavecussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses. you that were not reported to you inIf line 4 expenses are the only ones youAlso, your total expenses will be subject to the box 1 of Form W-2 ........... . $7,000are claiming, you received no reim-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies 2. Enter the total amount of yourbursements (or the reimbursementsto most miscellaneous itemized deductions on
TIP expenses for the periods covered bywere all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),Schedule A (Form 1040). this reimbursement ........... . 8,500
and the Special Rules  discussed later do not 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your
apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orExample. Kim's employer gives her $1,000 total expense for meals and
2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly ona month ($12,000 for the year) for her business entertainment .............. . 4,500
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the typeexpenses. Kim does not have to provide any 4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the
and amount of each expense on the dotted lines result as a decimal (rounded to atproof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim
and include the total on line 21. least three places) ........... . .529can keep any funds that she does not spend.
Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter theMeal and entertainment expenses. Showcountable plan. Her employer will include the result here and in Column B, line 7 3,703the full amount of your expenses for busi-$12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter theness-related meals and entertainment on FormIf Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, result here and in Column A, line 7 $3,2972106, line 5, Column B. Include meals whileshe must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297away from your tax home overnight and otheritemize her deductions. ($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inbusiness meals and entertainment. Enter 50%
Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Columnof the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment
Completing Forms B.expenses on line 9, Column B.
If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full2106 and 2106-EZ After you complete the form. After you haveamount of your meals and entertainment on the
completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followline to the left of line 5 and multiply the total byThis section briefly describes how employees the directions on that form to deduct your ex-50%. Enter the result on line 5.complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3 penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.explains what the employer reports on Form Hours of service limits. If you are subject For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule AW-2 and what the employee reports on Form to the Department of Transportation's ªhours of (Form 1040). However, if you are a government2106. The instructions for the forms have more serviceº limits, use 80% instead of 50% for official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,information on completing them. meals while away from your tax home. an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-
If you are self-employed, do not file ployee with impairment-related work expenses,Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report your see Special Rules, later.7, the amounts your employer (or third party)
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
CAUTION
! reimbursed you that were not included in box 1 Limits on employee business expenses.(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form of your Form W-2. (You cannot use Form Your employee business expenses may be sub-that you must file. 2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re- ject to either of the limits described next. Theseported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. limits are figured in the following order on theForm 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the Allocating your reimbursement. If you specified form.shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee were reimbursed under an accountable plan andbusiness expenses. You can use this form if you 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-want to deduct excess expenses that were notmeet all the following conditions. tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you• You are an employee deducting expenses bursement. This is necessary if your employer figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofattributable to your job. pays your reimbursement in the following man- Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain-ner:• You were not reimbursed by your em- ment Expenses, earlier.
ployer for your expenses (amounts in- • Pays you a single amount that covers 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not meals and/or entertainment, as well as tions. If you are an employee, deduct em-considered reimbursements). other business expenses, and ployee business expenses (as figured on Form
• If you are claiming car expenses, you use • Does not clearly identify how much is for 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A
the standard mileage rate. deductible meals and/or entertainment. (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions, including employee business ex-You must allocate that single payment so that penses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit isCar expenses. If you used a car to perform you know how much to enter on Form 2106, line figured on line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040).your job as an employee, you may be able to 7, Column A and Column B.
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex- Special Rules
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an
Car expenses using the standard mileage rate accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con- This section discusses special rules that apply
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com- sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter- to Armed Forces reservists, government offi-
pleting Part II and Part I, line 1. tainment and car expenses. Rob's employer did cials who are paid on a fee basis, performing
Page 188 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 191 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
artists, and disabled employees with impair- Expenses of certain performing artists. If Impairment-related work expenses are your
ment-related work expenses. you are a performing artist, you may qualify to allowable expenses for attendant care at your
deduct your employee business expenses as an workplace and other expenses you have in con-Armed Forces reservists traveling more than adjustment to gross income rather than as a nection with your workplace that are necessary100 miles from home. If you are a member of
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, for you to be able to work. For more information,a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the
you must meet all of the following requirements. see chapter 21.United States and you travel more than 100
miles away from home in connection with your 1. During the tax year, you perform servicesperformance of services as a member of the Illustrated Examplein the performing arts as an employee forreserves, you can deduct your travel expenses at least two employers.as an adjustment to gross income rather than as Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothing
a miscellaneous itemized deduction. The 2. You receive at least $200 each from any Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical travel week,
amount of expenses you can deduct as an ad- two of these employers. Bill leaves his home on Long Island on Mondayjustment to gross income is limited to the regular morning and drives to Albany to exhibit the3. Your related performing-arts business ex-federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, and Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-penses are more than 10% of your grossincidental expenses) and the standard mileage ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion'sincome from the performance of thoserate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees, new line of merchandise to Town Departmentservices.ferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explained
Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talksearlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Any 4. Your adjusted gross income is not more with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Townexpenses in excess of these amounts can be than $16,000 before deducting these busi- Department Store, to discuss the new line. Heclaimed only as a miscellaneous itemized de- ness expenses. later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerduction subject to the 2% limit.
to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new lineSpecial rules for married persons. If youMember of a reserve component. You are of clothing.are married, you must file a joint return unlessa member of a reserve component of the Armed
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2007.you lived apart from your spouse at all timesForces of the United States if you are in the
He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast during the tax year.
pense purposes. He records his total mileage,Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the If you file a joint return, you must figure re-United States, the Air National Guard of the business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for thequirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for bothUnited States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-you and your spouse. However, requirement (4)lic Health Service. nent information in a travel expense log (notapplies to your and your spouse's combined
shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses forHow to report. If you have reserve-related adjusted gross income.
lodging and for any other expenses of $75 ortravel that takes you more than 100 miles from Where to report.  If you meet all of the more.home, you should first complete Form 2106 or above requirements, you should first completeForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include yourreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 ofthe federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or He answers all the questions in Part II of FormForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the totalForm 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, 2106-EZ and figures his car expense to beon line 24 of Form 1040.line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on $10,000 (20,000 x 50 cents per mile).Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and If you do not meet all of the above require-
His total employee business expenses arededuct the balance as an itemized deduction on ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-
shown in the following table.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. penses as an adjustment to gross income.
You cannot deduct expenses of travel that Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or  Type of Expense Amountdoes not take you more than 100 miles from 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business
home as an adjustment to gross income. In- Parking fees and tolls ... . $ 520expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or Car expenses ......... . 10,000A (Form 1040), line 21.
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an Meals .............. . 3,861
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), Lodging, laundry, dry  
Impairment-related work expenses of dis-line 21. cleaning ............ . 18,318
abled employees. If you are an employee Entertainment ........ . 3,250Officials paid on a fee basis. Certain Gifts, education, etc. .... . 650with a physical or mental disability, your impair-fee-basis officials can claim their employee busi- Total .............. . $36,599ment-related work expenses are not subject toness expenses whether or not they itemize their the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap-other deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Bill received an allowance of $33,000plies to most other employee business ex-Fee-basis officials are persons who are em- ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.penses. After you complete Form 2106 orployed by a state or local government and who Bill did not have to account to his employer for2106-EZ, enter your impairment-related workare paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They
expenses from Form 2106, line 10, or Form the reimbursement, and the $33,000 was in-can deduct their business expenses in perform-
2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040), cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross
line 28, and identify the type and amount of thisincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized Because Bill's reimbursement was included
expense on the dotted line next to line 28. Enterdeduction. in his income and he is using the standard mile-
your employee business expenses that are un-If you are a fee-basis official, include your age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
related to your disability from Form 2106, lineemployee business expenses from Form 2106, 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form is10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, lineline 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040, shown on the next page.21.line 24.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

Page 192 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
November 15, 2010
Form  2106-EZ
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service   (99)
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment 
Sequence No.  129A
Your name Occupation in which you incurred expenses Social security number
You Can Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
• You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is 
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for 
your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
• You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not 
considered reimbursements for this purpose).
• If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2010.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2010 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year  
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
Part I Figure Your Expenses
1 Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 50¢ 
(.50) .............................. 1 
2 Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight 
travel or commuting to and from work ................... 2 
3 Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc. Do 
not include meals and entertainment .................... 3 
4 Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and 
entertainment ........................... 4 
5 Meals and entertainment expenses:   $ ×  50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred 
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.) 5 
6 Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or 
on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local 
government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the
instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.) ............ 6 
Part II Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7 When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) a /            /
8 Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2010, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
9 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours? .............. Yes No
10 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use? ............ Yes No
11a Do you have evidence to support your deduction? ................... Yes No
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written? ......................... Yes No
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2010)
Bill Wilson Sales 555
10,000
520
18,318
650
7,111
3,556
33,044
1/3/07
20,000 2,600 2,400
M
M
M
M
00 5555
Page 190 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 193 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
out if this legislation was enacted, go to www.irs. • The requirement serves a business pur-
gov/formspubs. Also see Publication 970, Tax pose of your employer, and
Benefits for Education. • The education is not part of a program that27.
will qualify you for a new trade or busi-When you figure your taxes, you may
ness.want to compare these tax benefits so
you can choose the method(s) that
TIP
Tax Benefits for When you get more education than your em-give you the lowest tax liability.
ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-
tion can be qualifying work-related educationWork-Related Useful Items only if it maintains or improves skills required inYou may want to see: your present work. See Education To Maintain
Education or Improve Skills, below.Publication
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Example. You are a teacher who has satis-
Expenses fied the minimum requirements for teaching.What's New Your employer requires you to take an additional❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
college course each year to keep your teachingStandard mileage rate. Generally, if you job. If the courses will not qualify you for a newForm (and Instructions)claim a business deduction for work-related ed- trade or business, they are qualifyingucation and you drive your car to and from ❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses work-related education even if you eventuallyschool, the amount you can deduct for miles receive a master's degree and an increase in❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeedriven during 2010 is 50 cents per mile. This is
salary because of this extra education.Business Expensesdown from 55 cents per mile in 2009. For more
information, see Transportation Expenses ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
under What Expenses Can Be Deducted. Education To MaintainDeductions
or Improve Skills
If your education is not required by your em-
Introduction ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-Qualifying Work- related education only if it maintains or improvesThis chapter discusses work-related education
skills needed in your present work. This couldexpenses that you may be able to deduct as Related Education include refresher courses, courses on currentbusiness expenses.
developments, and academic or vocationalTo claim such a deduction, you must: You can deduct the costs of qualifying work-
courses.related education as business expenses. This is• Be working,
education that meets at least one of the follow-
Example. You repair televisions, radios,• Itemize your deductions on Schedule A ing two tests.
(Form 1040) if you are an employee, and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep up
• The education is required by your em- with the latest changes, you take special• File Schedule C (Form 1040), Schedule ployer or the law to keep your present courses in radio and stereo service. TheseC-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form salary, status, or job. The required educa- courses maintain and improve skills required in1040) if you are self-employed, and tion must serve a bona fide business pur- your work.pose of your employer.• Have expenses for education that meet
the requirements discussed under Qualify- • The education maintains or improves skills Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.ing Work-Related Education. needed in your present work. Education to maintain or improve skills needed
in your present work is not qualifying education ifIf you are an employee and can itemize your However, even if the education meets one or it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-deductions, you may be able to claim a deduc- both of the above tests, it is not qualifying ness.tion for the expenses you pay for your work-related education if it:
work-related education. Your deduction will be Education during temporary absence. If• Is needed to meet the minimum educa-the amount by which your qualifying you stop working for a year or less in order to gettional requirements of your present tradework-related education expenses plus other job education to maintain or improve skills neededor business, orand certain miscellaneous expenses is greater in your present work and then return to the same
than 2% of your adjusted gross income. See • Is part of a program of study that will qual- general type of work, your absence is consid-
chapter 28. ify you for a new trade or business. ered temporary. Education that you get during aIf you are self-employed, you deduct your temporary absence is qualifying work-relatedexpenses for qualifying work-related education You can deduct the costs of qualifying education if it maintains or improves skillsdirectly from your self-employment income. work-related education as a business expense needed in your present work.Your work-related education expenses may even if the education could lead to a degree.
also qualify you for other tax benefits, such as Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check to Example. You quit your biology researchthe American opportunity and lifetime learning see if your education qualifies. job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-credits (see chapter 35 ). You may qualify for dent for one year. If you return to work in biologythese other benefits even if you do not meet the research after completing the courses, the edu-Education Required byrequirements listed earlier. cation is related to your present work even if youAlso, keep in mind that your work-related Employer or by Law do not go back to work with the same employer.education expenses may qualify you to claim
more than one tax benefit. Generally, you may Once you have met the minimum educational Education during indefinite absence. If
claim any number of benefits as long as you use requirements for your job, your employer or the you stop work for more than a year, your ab-
different expenses to figure each one. law may require you to get more education. This sence from your job is considered indefinite.
additional education is qualifying work-related Education during an indefinite absence, even if itAt the time this publication went to education if all three of the following require- maintains or improves skills needed in the workprint, Congress was considering legis- ments are met. from which you are absent, is considered tolation that would extend the tuition and
CAUTION
!
qualify you for a new trade or business. There-fees deduction. Your work-related education ex- • It is required for you to keep your present
fore, it is not qualifying work-related education.penses may also qualify for this benefit. To find salary, status, or job,
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 191

Page 194 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. The law in your state requires Example 3. Assume the same facts as inEducation To Meet beginning secondary school teachers to have a Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3
bachelor's degree, including 10 professional ed- years of college. The courses you take that leadMinimum Requirements
ucation courses. In addition, to keep the job a to a bachelor's degree (including those in edu-
Education you need to meet the minimum edu- teacher must complete a fifth year of training cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-
cational requirements for your present trade or within 10 years from the date of hire. If the tion. They are needed to meet the minimum
employing school certifies to the state Depart- educational requirements for employment as abusiness is not qualifying work-related educa-
ment of Education that qualified teachers cannot teacher.tion. The minimum educational requirements
be found, the school can hire persons with only 3are determined by:
Example 4. You have a bachelor's degreeyears of college. However, to keep their jobs,• Laws and regulations, and you work as a temporary instructor at athese teachers must get a bachelor's degree
university. At the same time, you take graduateand the required professional education courses• Standards of your profession, trade, or
courses toward an advanced degree. The ruleswithin 3 years.business, and
of the university state that you can become aUnder these facts, the bachelor's degree,• Your employer. faculty member only if you get a graduate de-whether or not it includes the 10 professional gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-education courses, is considered the minimumOnce you have met the minimum educational tor only as long as you show satisfactoryeducational requirement for qualification as arequirements that were in effect when you were progress toward getting this degree. You haveteacher in your state.hired, you do not have to meet any new mini- not met the minimum educational requirements
If you have all the required education exceptmum educational requirements. This means to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-
the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa- ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu-that if the minimum requirements change after
tional requirements. The fifth year of training is cation.you were hired, any education you need to meet qualifying work-related education unless it isthe new requirements can be qualifying educa- part of a program of study that will qualify you for Certification in a new state. Once you havetion. a new trade or business. met the minimum educational requirements forYou have not necessarily met the mini- teachers for your state, you are considered tomum educational requirements of your Example 2. Assume the same facts as in have met the minimum educational require-trade or business simply because you
CAUTION
! Example 1 except that you have a bachelor's ments in all states. This is true even if you mustare already doing the work. degree and only six professional education get additional education to be certified in an-
courses. The additional four education courses other state. Any additional education you need
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering can be qualifying work-related education. Al- is qualifying work-related education. You have
student. Although you have not received your though you do not have all the required courses, already met the minimum requirements for
you have already met the minimum educational teaching. Teaching in another state is not a newdegree or certification, you work part-time as an
requirements. trade or business.engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
when you become a faculty member. You gen-
erally will be considered a faculty member when
one or more of the following occurs.
• You have tenure.
• Your years of service count toward ob-
taining tenure.
• You have a vote in faculty decisions.
• Your school makes contributions for you to
a retirement plan other than social security
or a similar program.
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Page 192 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 195 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You hold a permanent teaching • Classroom teacher to guidance counselor. Attendance not on a temporary basis.
You do not go to school on a temporary basis ifcertificate in State A and are employed as a • Classroom teacher to school administra- either of the following situations apply to you.teacher in that state for several years. You move tor.to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher.
1. Your attendance at school is realisticallyYou are required, however, to complete certain
expected to last more than 1 year. It doesprescribed courses to get a permanent teaching not matter how long you actually attend.certificate in State B. These additional courses
are qualifying work-related education because 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-What Expenses Can Be
the teaching position in State B involves the tically expected to last 1 year or less, but
same general kind of work for which you were at a later date your attendance is reasona-Deducted
qualified in State A. bly expected to last more than 1 year. Your
attendance is not temporary after the dateIf your education meets the requirements de-
you determine it will last more than 1 year.scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-RelatedEducation That Education, you can generally deduct your edu-
Qualifies You for a cation expenses as business expenses. If you
are not self-employed, you can deduct businessNew Trade or Business Deductible Transportationexpenses only if you itemize your deductions.
ExpensesYou cannot deduct expenses related toEducation that is part of a program of study that
tax-exempt and excluded income.will qualify you for a new trade or business is not If you are regularly employed and go directly
qualifying work-related education. This is true from home to school on a temporary basis, youDeductible expenses. The following educa-even if you do not plan to enter that trade or can deduct the round-trip costs of transportationtion expenses can be deducted.business. between your home and school. This is true
• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-If you are an employee, a change of duties regardless of the location of the school, theilar items.that involves the same general kind of work is distance traveled, or whether you attend school
not a new trade or business. on nonwork days.• Certain transportation and travel costs.
Transportation expenses include the actual• Other education expenses, such as costsExample 1. You are an accountant. Your costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellof research and typing when writing a pa-employer requires you to get a law degree at as the costs of using your car. Transportationper as part of an educational program.your own expense. You register at a law school expenses do not include amounts spent for
for the regular curriculum that leads to a law travel, meals, or lodging while you are away
degree. Even if you do not intend to become a Nondeductible expenses. You cannot de- from home overnight.
lawyer, the education is not qualifying because duct personal or capital expenses. For example,
the law degree will qualify you for a new trade or you cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation Example 1. You regularly work in a nearby
business. time or annual leave you take to attend classes. town, and go directly from work to home. You
This amount is a personal expense. also attend school every work night for 3 months
Example 2. You are a general practitioner to take a course that improves your job skills.Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do notof medicine. You take a 2-week course to review Since you are attending school on a temporaryclaim reimbursement that you are entitled todevelopments in several specialized fields of basis, you can deduct your daily round-tripreceive from your employer, you cannot deductmedicine. The course does not qualify you for a transportation expenses in going between homethe expenses that apply to the reimbursement.new profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- and school. This is true regardless of the dis-
cation because it maintains or improves skills tance traveled.Example. Your employer agrees to payrequired in your present profession. your education expenses if you file a voucher Example 2. Assume the same facts as inshowing your expenses. You do not file aExample 3. While working in the private Example 1 except that on certain nights you govoucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be-practice of psychiatry, you enter a program to directly from work to school and then home. Youcause you did not file a voucher, you cannotstudy and train at an accredited psychoanalytic can deduct your transportation expenses fromdeduct the expenses on your tax return.institute. The program will lead to qualifying you your regular work site to school and then home.
to practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic
Transportation Expenses Example 3. Assume the same facts as intraining does not qualify you for a new profes-
Example 1 except that you attend the school forsion. It is qualifying work-related education be- If your education qualifies, you can deduct local 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Sincecause it maintains or improves skills required in transportation costs of going directly from work you are attending school on a temporary basis,your present profession. to school. If you are regularly employed and go you can deduct your round-trip transportation
to school on a temporary basis, you can also expenses in going between home and school.
deduct the costs of returning from school toBar or CPA Review Course home. Example 4. Assume the same facts as in
Review courses to prepare for the bar examina- Example 1 except that you attend classes twiceTemporary basis. You go to school on a
tion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex- a week for 15 months. Since your attendance intemporary basis if either of the following situa-
amination are not qualifying work-related school is not considered temporary, you cannottions applies to you.
deduct your transportation expenses in goingeducation. They are part of a program of study
1. Your attendance at school is realistically between home and school. If you go directlythat can qualify you for a new profession.
expected to last 1 year or less and does from work to school, you can deduct the
indeed last for 1 year or less. one-way transportation expenses of going from
work to school. If you go from work to home toTeaching and Related Duties 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis- school and return home, your transportation ex-tically expected to last 1 year or less, butAll teaching and related duties are considered penses cannot be more than if you had goneat a later date your attendance is reasona-the same general kind of work. A change in directly from work to school.bly expected to last more than 1 year. Yourduties in any of the following ways is not consid- attendance is temporary up to the date youered a change to a new business. Using your car. If you use your car (whetherdetermine it will last more than 1 year. you own or lease it) for transportation to school,• Elementary school teacher to secondary you can deduct your actual expenses or use theschool teacher. standard mileage rate to figure the amount youNote. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)
• Teacher of one subject, such as biology, can deduct. The standard mileage rate for milesabove, your attendance is not temporary if facts
driven during 2010 is 50 cents a mile. Whicheverto teacher of another subject, such as art. and circumstances indicate otherwise.
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 193

Page 196 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
method you use, you can also deduct parking Dave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-
fees and tolls. See chapter 26 for information on his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can lowships (see chapter 1 of Publication
deducting your actual expenses of using a car. deduct only his expenses for meals (subject to 970),
the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationattended the seminar.Travel Expenses 970),
Cruises and conventions. Certain cruises • Employer-provided educational assistanceYou can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see and conventions offer seminars or courses as (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),50% limit on meals , later), and lodging if you part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars ortravel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying • Veterans' educational assistance (seecourses are work-related, your deduction forwork-related education. chapter 1 of Publication 970), andtravel may be limited. This applies to:Travel expenses for qualifying work-related • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments• Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or othereducation are treated the same as travel ex- (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedform of luxury water transportation, andpenses for other employee business purposes. for education assistance.For more information, see chapter 26. • Conventions outside the North American
area.You cannot deduct expenses for per- Amounts that do not reduce qualifyingsonal activities, such as sightseeing, work-related education expenses. Do notFor a discussion of the limits on travel ex-visiting, or entertaining.
CAUTION
! reduce the qualifying work-related education ex-pense deductions that apply to cruises and con-
penses by amounts paid with funds the studentventions, see Luxury Water Travel andMainly personal travel. If your travel away receives as:Conventions in chapter 1 of Publication 463.from home is mainly personal, you cannot de-
• Payment for services, such as wages,duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and 50% limit on meals. You can deduct only
lodging. You can deduct only your expenses for 50% of the cost of your meals while traveling • A loan,lodging and 50% of your expenses for meals away from home to obtain qualifying • A gift,during the time you attend the qualified educa- work-related education. You cannot have been
tional activities. reimbursed for the meals. • An inheritance, orWhether a trip's purpose is mainly personal Employees must use Form 2106 or Form • A withdrawal from the student's personalor educational depends upon the facts and cir- 2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit. savings.cumstances. An important factor is the compari-
son of time spent on personal activities with time
Also, do not reduce the qualifyingspent on educational activities. If you spend Travel as Education work-related education expenses by any schol-more time on personal activities, the trip is con-
arship or fellowship reported as income on thesidered mainly educational only if you can show You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of
student's return or any scholarship which, by itsa substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to education even if it is directly related to your
terms, cannot be applied to qualifyinga particular location. duties in your work or business.
work-related education expenses. 
Example 1. John works in Newark, New Example. You are a French language
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for
ble 1-week course at the request of his em- travel, you traveled through France to improve
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago your knowledge of the French language. You Reimbursements
was to take the course. chose your itinerary and most of your activities
While there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- to improve your French language skills. You How you treat reimbursements depends on the
tained some friends, and took a side trip to cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa- arrangement you have with your employer.
Pleasantville for a day. tion expenses. This is true even if you spent There are two basic types of reimbursement
Since the trip was mainly for business, John most of your time learning French by visiting arrangementsÐaccountable plans and nonac-
can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He French schools and families, attending movies countable plans. You can tell the type of plan
cannot deduct his transportation expenses of or plays, and engaging in similar activities. you are reimbursed under by the way the reim-
going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the bursement is reported on your Form W-2.
meals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging For information about how to treat reim-No Double Benefit Allowedconnected with his educational activities. bursements under both accountable and nonac-
countable plans, see Reimbursements  inYou cannot do either of the following.Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She went chapter 26.• Deduct work-related education expensesto a university in Michigan to take a course for
as business expenses if you benefit fromwork. The course is qualifying work-related edu-
these expenses under any other provisioncation.
of the law, for example, as an educationShe took one course, which is one-fourth of a Deducting Businesscredit (see chapter 35). full course load of study. She spent the rest of
the time on personal activities. Her reasons for • Deduct work-related education expenses Expensestaking the course in Michigan were all personal. paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, orSue's trip is mainly personal because employer-provided educational assis- Self-employed persons and employees reportthree-fourths of her time is considered personal tance. See Adjustments to Qualifying business expenses differently.time. She cannot deduct the cost of her Work-Related Education Expenses, be- The following information explains whatround-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de- low. forms you must use to deduct the cost of yourduct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50% qualifying work-related education as a businesslimit) and lodging costs for the time she attended expense.the university. Adjustments to Qualifying
Work-Related Education Expenses
Example 3. Dave works in Nashville and Self-Employed Persons
recently traveled to California to take a 2-week If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-
seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-related penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannot If you are self-employed, you must report the
education. claim a deduction for those amounts. You must cost of your qualifying work-related education on
While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks on reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount of the appropriate form used to report your busi-
personal activities. The facts, including the extra any tax-free educational assistance you re- ness income and expenses (generally Schedule
8-week stay, show that his main purpose was to ceived. C, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses
take a vacation. Tax-free educational assistance includes: include expenses for a car or truck, travel, or
Page 194 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 197 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
meals, report those expenses the same way you the cost of your qualifying work-related educa- At the time this publication went to
report other business expenses for those items. tion as an adjustment to gross income rather print, Congress was considering legis-
See the instructions for the form you file for than as an itemized deduction. lation that would extend the deduction
CAUTION
!
information on how to complete it. for educator expenses as an adjustment to in-Include the cost of your qualifying come. If this is not extended, you may be able towork-related education with any other employee claim these expenses as a miscellaneous de-business expenses on Form 1040, line 24. YouEmployees duction. To find out if this legislation was en-do not have to itemize your deductions on acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov/If you are an employee, you can deduct the cost Schedule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the formspubs.of qualifying work-related education only if you: deduction is not subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You must Certain property eliminated from the defini-1. Did not receive any reimbursement from complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your tion of listed property. For tax years begin-your employer, deduction, even if you meet the requirements ning after 2009, cellular telephones and similardescribed earlier under Form not required.2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable telecommunications equipment has been re-plan (amount is included in box 1 of Form For more information on qualified performing moved from the definition of listed property. ForW-2), or artists, see chapter 6 of Publication 463. more details, go to Publication 529, Miscellane-
ous Deductions.3. Received reimbursement under an ac-
countable plan, but the amount received Impairment-Related Work Standard mileage rate. The 2010 rate forwas less than your expenses. Expenses business use of a vehicle is 50 cents per mile.
If either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the
If you are disabled and have impairment-relatedtotal qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de-
work expenses that are necessary for you to beduct only the qualifying costs that were more
able to get qualifying work-related education,than your reimbursement. Introductionyou can deduct these expenses on Schedule AIn order to deduct the cost of your qualifying
(Form 1040), line 28. They are not subject to the This chapter explains which expenses you canwork-related education as a business expense,
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deduct claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions oninclude the amount with your deduction for any
these expenses, you must complete Form 2106 Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce theother employee business expenses on Sched-
or 2106-EZ even if you meet the requirements total of most miscellaneous itemized deductionsule A (Form 1040), line 21. (Special rules for
described earlier under Form not required. by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-expenses of certain performing artists and
ter covers the following topics.fee-basis officials and for impairment-related For more information on impairment-related
work expenses are explained later.) work expenses, see chapter 6 of Publication • Deductions subject to the 2% limit.
463.This deduction is subject to the • Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
to most miscellaneous itemized deductions. See • Expenses you cannot deduct.
chapter 28.
You must keep records to verify yourRecordkeeping
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. To figure your deduc- deductions. You should keep receipts,
tion for employee business expenses, including canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-
RECORDSYou must keep records as proof of anyqualifying work-related education, you generally nancial account statements, and other docu-deduction claimed on your tax return.must complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. mentary evidence. For more information onGenerally, you should keep your rec-
RECORDS recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-Form not required. Do not complete either ords for 3 years from the date of filing the tax keeping for Individuals. Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if: return and claiming the deduction.
• All reimbursements, if any, are included in For specific information about keeping rec-
Useful Itemsbox 1 of your Form W-2, and ords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping
You may want to see:in chapter 26.• You are not claiming travel, transportation,
meal, or entertainment expenses. Publication
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarIf you meet both of these requirements, enter
Expensesthe expenses directly on Schedule A (Form
1040), line 21. (Special rules for expenses of ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionscertain performing artists and fee-basis officials
❏ 535 Business Expenses28.and for impairment-related work expenses are
explained below.) ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by DaycareUsing Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorter
Providers)and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,
Miscellaneousyou can use this form if: ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
• All reimbursements, if any, are included in
Form (and Instructions)box 1 of your Form W-2, and Deductions
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized• You are using the standard mileage rate if
Deductionsyou are claiming vehicle expenses.
❏ 2106 Employee Business ExpensesWhat's NewIf you do not meet both of these requirements,
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employeeuse Form 2106.
Business ExpensesLimit on itemized deductions. For 2010, the
dollar limitations for itemized deductions basedPerforming Artists and on your adjusted gross income has expired.
Fee-Basis Officials
Educator expenses. For 2010, the deduction
If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state for educator expenses as an adjustment to in-
(or local) government official who is paid in come has expired. See Educator Expenses in
whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct this chapter.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 195

Page 198 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
At the time this publication went toBusiness Liability Insurance
print, Congress was considering legis-Deductions Subject You can deduct insurance premiums you paid lation that would reinstate the deduc-
CAUTION
!
tion for educator expenses as an adjustment tofor protection against personal liability forto the 2% Limit income. The find out if this legislation was en-wrongful acts on the job.
acted, and for more details, go to www.irs.gov/You can deduct certain expenses as miscellane- formspubs.ous itemized deductions on Schedule A Damages for Breach of(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex-
Employment Contractpenses that is more than 2% of your adjusted
Home Officegross income. You figure your deduction on If you break an employment contract, you canSchedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted If you use a part of your home regularly anddeduct damages you pay your former employergross income from the total amount of these exclusively for business purposes, you may bethat are attributable to the pay you received fromexpenses. Your adjusted gross income is the able to deduct a part of the operating expensesthat employer.amount on Form 1040, line 38. and depreciation of your home.
Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you You can claim this deduction for the busi-
apply any other deduction limit. For example, ness use of a part of your home only if you useDepreciation on Computersyou apply the 50% (or 80%) limit on busi- that part of your home regularly and exclusively:
ness-related meals and entertainment (dis- You can claim a depreciation deduction for a • As your principal place of business for anycussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2% computer that you use in your work as an em- trade or business,limit. ployee if its use is:
• As a place to meet or deal with your pa-Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-
• For the convenience of your employer, tients, clients, or customers in the normalcussed in the three categories in which you
and course of your trade or business, orreport them on Schedule A (Form 1040).
• Required as a condition of your employ- • In the case of a separate structure not• Unreimbursed employee expenses (line
ment. attached to your home, in connection with21).
your trade or business.• Tax preparation fees (line 22). For more information about the rules and ex-
ceptions to the rules affecting the allowable de- The regular and exclusive business use must• Other expenses (line 23).
be for the convenience of your employer and notductions for a home computer, see Publication
just appropriate and helpful in your job. Get529.
Publication 587 for more detailed informationUnreimbursed Employee
and a worksheet.Expenses (Line 21) Dues to Chambers of Commerce
and Professional SocietiesGenerally, the following expenses are deducti- Job Search Expensesble on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.
You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-You can deduct only unreimbursed em- You can deduct certain expenses you have insional organizations (such as bar associationsployee expenses that are: looking for a new job in your present occupation,and medical associations) and to chambers of even if you do not get a new job. You cannot• Paid or incurred during your tax year, commerce and similar organizations, if member- deduct these expenses if:ship helps you carry out the duties of your job.• For carrying on your trade or business of
• You are looking for a job in a new occupa-Similar organizations include:being an employee, and tion,
• Boards of trade,• Ordinary and necessary. • There was a substantial break between
• Business leagues, the ending of your last job and your look- An expense is ordinary if it is common and ing for a new one, or• Civic or public service organizations,accepted in your trade, business, or profession.
An expense is necessary if it is appropriate and • You are looking for a job for the first time.• Real estate boards, andhelpful to your business. An expense does not
• Trade associations.have to be required to be considered necessary. Employment and outplacement agency fees.Examples of unreimbursed employee ex- You can deduct employment and outplacementpenses are listed next. The list is followed by Lobbying and political activities. You may agency fees you pay in looking for a new job indiscussions of additional unreimbursed em- not be able to deduct that part of your dues that your present occupation.ployee expenses. is for certain lobbying and political activities. See Employer pays you back. If, in a later year,Dues used for lobbying  under Lobbying Ex-• Business bad debt of an employee. your employer pays you back for employmentpenses, later. agency fees, you must include the amount you• Education that is work related. (See chap-
receive in your gross income up to the amount ofter 27.)
your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov-Educator Expenses• Legal fees related to your job. eries in chapter 12.)
• Licenses and regulatory fees. In 2009, if you were an eligible educator, you Employer pays the employment agency.
could deduct your qualified education expenses If your employer pays the fees directly to the• Malpractice insurance premiums.
employment agency and you are not responsi-as an adjustment to income up to $250. If your• Medical examinations required by an em- ble for them, you do not include them in yourordinary and necessary educator expensesployer. gross income.were over that amount, you could deduct the
• Occupational taxes. excess as a miscellaneous itemized deduction RÂesumÂe. You can deduct amounts you spendsubject to the 2% limit. The provision that al-• Passport for a business trip. for preparing and mailing copies of a r ÂesumÂe tolowed qualified educator expenses to be de- prospective employers if you are looking for a• Subscriptions to professional journals and ducted as an adjustment to income expired at new job in your present occupation.trade magazines related to your work. the end of 2009. For 2010, you can deduct
ordinary and necessary educator expenses only• Travel, transportation, entertainment, and Travel and transportation expenses. If you
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction (un-gifts related to your work. (See chapter travel to an area and, while there, you look for a
26.) reimbursed employee business expenses). new job in your present occupation, you may be
Page 196 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 199 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
able to deduct travel expenses to and from the If local military rules do not allow you to wearUnion Dues and Expenses
area. You can deduct the travel expenses if the fatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you can
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you paytrip is primarily to look for a new job. The amount deduct the amount by which the cost of buying
for union membership.of time you spend on personal activity compared and keeping up these uniforms is more than the
You can also deduct assessments for benefitto the amount of time you spend in looking for uniform allowance you receive.
payments to unemployed union members. How-work is important in determining whether the trip You can deduct the cost of your uniforms ifever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a you are a civilian faculty or staff member of aments or contributions that provides funds fornew job. military school.the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex-
Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-penses to and from an area, you can deduct the
sion fund, even if the union requires you to makeexpenses of looking for a new job in your pres- Tax Preparation Fees 
the contributions.ent occupation while in the area. (Line 22)You may not be able to deduct amounts youYou can choose to use the standard mileage
pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-rate to figure your car expenses. The 2010 rate You can usually deduct tax preparation fees ining and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-for business use of a vehicle is 50 cents per the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2010penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.mile. See chapter 26 for more information. return, you can deduct fees paid in 2010 for
preparing your 2009 return. These fees include
the cost of tax preparation software programsWork Clothes and UniformsLicenses and Regulatory Fees and tax publications. They also include any fee
you paid for electronic filing of your return.You can deduct the cost and upkeep of workYou can deduct the amount you pay each year
clothes if the following two requirements areto state or local governments for licenses and
met.regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro- Other Expenses (Line 23)
fession. • You must wear them as a condition of You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-your employment. cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the
2% limit. On Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23,• The clothes are not suitable for everydayOccupational Taxes
you can deduct expenses that you pay:wear.
You can deduct an occupational tax charged at
1. To produce or collect income that must bea flat rate by a locality for the privilege of working It is not enough that you wear distinc- included in your gross income,or conducting a business in the locality. If you tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-are an employee, you can claim occupational 2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-cifically required by your employer. Nor
CAUTION
!taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subject erty held for producing such income, oris it enough that you do not, in fact, wear yourto the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a work clothes away from work. The clothing must 3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return. not be suitable for taking the place of your regu- fund of any tax.
lar clothing.
You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-Examples of workers who may be able toRepayment of Income Aid Payment poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are: sonably and closely related to these purposes.An ªincome aid paymentº is one that is received delivery workers, firefighters, health care work- Some of these other expenses are explained inunder an employer's plan to aid employees who ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers, the following discussions.lose their jobs because of lack of work. If you professional athletes, and transportation work-
repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you ers (air, rail, bus, etc.). If the expenses you pay produce income that
received and included in income in an earlier Musicians and entertainers can deduct the is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Income
year, you can deduct the repayment. cost of theatrical clothing and accessories that Expenses , later, under Nondeductible Ex-
are not suitable for everyday wear. penses.
However, work clothing consisting of white
cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-Research Expenses of a College
alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter is Appraisal FeesProfessor
required by his union to wear on the job, is not
You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them toIf you are a college professor, you can deduct distinctive in character or in the nature of a
figure a casualty loss or the fair market value ofresearch expenses, including travel expenses, uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-
donated property.for teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at the
on subjects that relate directly to your teaching request of a foreman are not deductible.
duties. You must have undertaken the research
Casualty and Theft Lossesas a means of carrying out the duties expected Protective clothing. You can deduct the cost
of a professor and without expectation of profit of protective clothing required in your work, such You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aapart from salary. However, you cannot deduct as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hard miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to thethe cost of travel as a form of education. hats, and work gloves. 2% limit if you used the damaged or stolenExamples of workers who may be required to property in performing services as an employee.wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work- First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,Tools Used in Your Work ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat Casualties and Thefts. You may also have tocrew members, machinists, oil field workers, include the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-Generally, you can deduct amounts you spend pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers. ness Property, if you are otherwise required tofor tools used in your work if the tools wear out
file that form. To figure your deduction, add alland are thrown away within 1 year from the date
Military uniforms. You generally cannot de- casualty or theft losses from this type of propertyof purchase. You can depreciate the cost of
duct the cost of your uniforms if you are on included on Form 4684, lines 35 and 41b, ortools that have a useful life substantially beyond
full-time active duty in the armed forces. How- Form 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftthe tax year. For more information about depre-
ever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you losses, see chapter 25.ciation, see Publication 946.
can deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni-
form if military regulations restrict you from
wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In Clerical Help and Office Rent
figuring the deduction, you must reduce the cost
by any nontaxable allowance you receive for You can deduct office expenses, such as rent
these expenses. and clerical help, that you have in connection
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 197

Page 200 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with your investments and collecting the taxable income or that you pay in connection with theIndirect Deductions of
income on them. determination, collection, or refund of any tax.Pass-Through Entities
You can also deduct legal expenses that are:
Pass-through entities include partnerships, S
• Related to either doing or keeping yourCredit or Debit Card Convenience corporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-
job, such as those you paid to defendlicly offered. Deductions of pass-through entitiesFees
yourself against criminal charges arisingare passed through to the partners or sharehold-
You can deduct the convenience fee charged by out of your trade or business,ers. The partners or shareholders can deduct
the card processor for paying your income tax their share of passed-through deductions for • For tax advice related to a divorce, if the(including estimated tax payments) by credit or investment expenses as miscellaneous item- bill specifies how much is for tax advicedebit card. The fees are deductible in the year ized deductions subject to the 2% limit. and it is determined in a reasonable way,paid.
orExample. You are a member of an invest-
ment club that is formed solely to invest in secur- • To collect taxable alimony.
Depreciation on Home Computer ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The
partnership's income is solely from taxable divi- You can deduct expenses of resolving taxYou can deduct depreciation on your home dends, interest, and gains from sales of securi- issues relating to profit or loss from businesscomputer if you use it to produce income (for ties. In this case, you can deduct your share of (Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royaltiesexample, to manage your investments that pro- the partnership's operating expenses as miscel- (Schedule E), or farm income and expensesduce taxable income). You generally must de- laneous itemized deductions subject to the 2% (Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Youpreciate the computer using the straight line limit. However, if the investment club partner- deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness taxmethod over the Alternative Depreciation Sys- ship has investments that also produce nontax- issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Taxtem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as an able income, you cannot deduct your share of Preparation Fees, earlier.employee and also use the computer in that the partnership's expenses that produce the
work, see Publication 946. nontaxable income.
Loss on Deposits
Publicly offered mutual funds. Publicly of-Excess Deductions of an Estate For information on whether, and if so, how, youfered mutual funds do not pass deductions for
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualifiedinvestment expenses through to shareholders.If an estate's total deductions in its last tax year
financial institution, see Loss on Deposits  inA mutual fund is ªpublicly offeredº if it is:are more than its gross income for that year, the
chapter 25.beneficiaries succeeding to the estate's prop- • Continuously offered pursuant to a publicerty can deduct the excess. Do not include de- offering,ductions for the estate's personal exemption
• Regularly traded on an established securi- Repayments of Incomeand charitable contributions when figuring the
ties market, orestate's total deductions. The beneficiaries can
If you had to repay an amount that you includedclaim the deduction only for the tax year in • Held by or for at least 500 persons at all in income in an earlier year, you may be able towhich, or with which, the estate terminates, times during the tax year. deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount youwhether the year of termination is a normal year
had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 oror a short tax year. For more information, see A publicly offered mutual fund will send you a less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If itTermination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi- Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, or was more than $3,000, see Repayments Undervors, Executors, and Administrators. a substitute form, showing the net amount of Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject todividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
the 2% Limit, later.ment expenses). This net figure is the amount
Fees to Collect Interest and you report on your return as income. You cannot
Dividends deduct investment expenses.
Repayments of Social Security
You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, BenefitsInformation returns. You should receive in-trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable
formation returns from pass-through entities.bond interest or dividends on shares of stock. For information on how to deduct your repay-
But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker ments of certain social security benefits, seePartnerships and S corporations. These
to buy investment property, such as stocks or Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap-entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the items
bonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the ter 11.and amounts you must report and identifies the
property. tax return schedules and lines to use.
You cannot deduct the fee you pay to a
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. Thesebroker to sell securities. You can use the fee Safe Deposit Box Rentfunds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, Dividendsonly to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the
and Distributions or a substitute form, showinginstructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col- You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you use
your share of gross income and investment ex-umns (d) and (e), for information on how to the box to store taxable income-producingpenses. You can claim the expenses only as areport the fee. stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andmiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the documents. You cannot deduct the rent if you2% limit. use the box only for jewelry, other personal
Hobby Expenses items, or tax-exempt securities.
Investment Fees and ExpensesYou can generally deduct hobby expenses, but
only up to the amount of hobby income. A hobby Service Charges on DividendYou can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,is not a business because it is not carried on to Reinvestment Planstrust administration fees, and other expensesmake a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-
you paid for managing your investments thatter 12 under Other Income. You can deduct service charges you pay as aproduce taxable income.
subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.
These service charges include payments for:
Legal Expenses • Holding shares acquired through a plan,
• Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,You can usually deduct legal expenses that you
andincur in attempting to produce or collect taxable
Page 198 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 201 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Keeping individual records and providing Casualty and Theft Losses of Impairment-Related Work
detailed statements of accounts. Income-Producing Property Expenses
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a If you have a physical or mental disability thatTrustee's Administrative Fees for miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
IRA the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property its one or more of your major life activities, such
was income-producing property (property held as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,
Trustee's administrative fees that are billed sep- for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds, breathing, learning, and working, you can de-
arately and paid by you in connection with your gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, duct your impairment-related work expenses.
individual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de- report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-
ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as a may also have to include the loss on Form 4797, nary and necessary business expenses for at-
Sales of Business Property if you are otherwise tendant care services at your place of work andmiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the
required to file that form. To figure your deduc- for other expenses in connection with your place2% limit. For more information about IRAs, see
tion, add all casualty or theft losses from this of work that are necessary for you to be able tochapter 17.
type of property included on Form 4684, lines 35 work.
and 41b, or Form 4797, line 18a. For more Self-employed. If you are self-employed,information on casualty and theft losses, see enter your impairment-related work expenseschapter 25. on the appropriate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E,Deductions Not or F) used to report your business income and
expenses.Subject to the 2% Limit Federal Estate Tax on Income in
Respect of a Decedent
You can deduct the items listed below as miscel- Loss From Other Activities FromYou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub- Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2ble to income in respect of a decedent that youject to the 2% limit. Report these items on
as a beneficiary include in your gross income.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (FormIncome in respect of the decedent is gross in- 1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule Acome that the decedent would have received (Form 1040), line 28. It is not subject to theList of Deductions had death not occurred and that was not prop- passive activity limitations.erly includible in the decedent's final income taxEach of the following items is discussed in detail return. See Publication 559 for more informa-
after the list. tion. Repayments Under Claim of Right• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you• Casualty and theft losses from income- Gambling Losses Up to the included in your income in an earlier year be-producing property. Amount of Gambling Winnings cause at the time you thought you had an un-
• Federal estate tax on income in respect of restricted right to it, you may be able to deductYou must report the full amount of your gambling the amount you repaid or take a credit againsta decedent. winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You your tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam- deduct your gambling losses for the year on more information.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28. You cannotbling winnings.
deduct gambling losses that are more than your• Impairment-related work expenses of per- winnings. Unrecovered Investment insons with disabilities.
You cannot reduce your gambling win- Annuity• Loss from other activities from Schedule nings by your gambling losses and re-
K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2. A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-port the difference. You must report the
CAUTION
!
ity can exclude from income a part of eachfull amount of your winnings as income and• Losses from Ponzi-type investment payment received as a tax-free return of theclaim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)schemes. retiree's investment. If the retiree dies before theas an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-
• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-ords should show your winnings separately from
recovered investment can be deducted on theclaim of right. your losses.
retiree's final income tax return. See chapter 10• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Diary of winnings and losses. You for more information about the tax treatment of
must keep an accurate diary or similar pensions and annuities.
record of your losses and winnings.
RECORDSAmortizable Premium on Taxable
Your diary should contain at least the followingBonds information.
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is Nondeductible• The date and type of your specific wager
greater than its stated principal amount, the ex- or wagering activity.
Expensescess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize • The name and address or location of thethe premium on taxable bonds. The amortization gambling establishment. Examples of nondeductible expenses are listedof the premium is generally an offset to interest
next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-• The names of other persons present withincome on the bond rather than a separate de- tional nondeductible expenses.you at the gambling establishment.duction item.
• The amount(s) you won or lost.Part of the premium on some bonds may be
List of Nondeductiblea miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2% See Publication 529 for more information.limit. For more information, see Amortizable Expenses
Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529,
and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 of • Broker's commissions that you paid in
Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- connection with your IRA or other invest-
penses. ment property.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 199

Page 202 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Burial or funeral expenses, including the tools, instruments, or other items, in your car to Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt
cost of a cemetery lot.  and from work, you can deduct only the addi- organization notifies you that part of the dues or
tional cost of hauling the items such as the rent other amounts you pay to the organization are• Capital expenses. on a trailer to carry the items. used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,
• Fees and licenses, such as car licenses, you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
marriage licenses, and dog tags. penses in Publication 529 for information on
Fines or Penalties exceptions.• Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses,
earlier. You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to
a governmental unit for violating a law. This• Home repairs, insurance, and rent. Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property
includes an amount paid in settlement of your• Illegal bribes and kickbacksÐSee Bribes actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty You cannot deduct a loss based on the mereand kickbacks in chapter 11 of Publication (civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include disappearance of money or property. However,535. parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de- an accidental loss or disappearance of property
• Losses from the sale of your home, furni- can qualify as a casualty if it results from anducted from teachers' paychecks after an illegal
ture, personal car, etc. identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, orstrike.
unusual. See chapter 25.• Personal disability insurance premiums.
• Personal, living, or family expenses. Example. A car door is accidentallyHealth Spa Expenses
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of• The value of wages never received or lost You cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if your diamond ring. The diamond falls from thevacation time. there is a job requirement to stay in excellent ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond
physical condition, such as might be required of is a casualty.
a law enforcement officer.Adoption Expenses
You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting a Lunches with Co-workers
child, but you may be able to take a credit for Home Security System
those expenses. See chapter 37. You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with
You cannot deduct the cost of a home security co-workers, except while traveling away from
system as a miscellaneous deduction. However, home on business. See chapter 26 for informa-
you may be able to claim a deduction for a home tion on deductible expenses while travelingCampaign Expenses
security system as a business expense if you away from home.
You cannot deduct campaign expenses of a have a home office. See Home Office  under
candidate for any office, even if the candidate is Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, and
running for reelection to the office. These in- Security System under Deducting Expenses  in Meals While Working Late
clude qualification and registration fees for pri- Publication 587.
mary elections. You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-
ing late. However, you may be able to claim aLegal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees deduction if the cost of meals is a deductibleInvestment-Related Seminarspaid to defend charges that arise from partici- entertainment expense, or if you are travelingpation in a political campaign. You cannot deduct any expenses for attending a away from home. See chapter 26 for information
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in- on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-
vestment purposes. penses while traveling away from home.Check-Writing Fees on Personal
Account
Life Insurance Premiums Personal Legal ExpensesIf you have a personal checking account, you
cannot deduct fees charged by the bank for the You cannot deduct premiums you pay on your You cannot deduct personal legal expensesprivilege of writing checks, even if the account life insurance. You may be able to deduct, as such as those for the following.pays interest. alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance • Custody of children.policies assigned to your former spouse. See
chapter 18 for information on alimony. • Breach of promise to marry suit.Club Dues
• Civil or criminal charges resulting from a
Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem- personal relationship.Lobbying Expensesbership in any club organized for business, plea- • Damages for personal injury, except forsure, recreation, or other social purpose. This You generally cannot deduct amounts paid or certain unlawful discrimination andincludes business, social, athletic, luncheon, incurred for lobbying expenses. These include whistleblower claims.sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. expenses to:
• Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-You cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-
• Influence legislation, tion of a title).tion if one of its main purposes is to:
• Participate or intervene in any political • Preparation of a will.• Conduct entertainment activities for mem-
campaign for, or against, any candidatebers or their guests, or • Property claims or property settlement in afor public office,
divorce.• Provide members or their guests with ac-
• Attempt to influence the general public, orcess to entertainment facilities.
segments of the public, about elections, You cannot deduct these expenses even if a
legislative matters, or referendums, or result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in- Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon
come-producing property.clubs are not deductible. • Communicate directly with covered execu-
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
ence the official actions or positions of
Political ContributionsCommuting Expenses those officials.
Lobbying expenses also include any amounts You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-You cannot deduct commuting expenses (the
paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan- ical candidate, a campaign committee, or acost of transportation between your home and
your main or regular place of work). If you haul ning, or coordination of any of these activities. newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention
Page 200 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 203 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs expenses even if you are attending the meeting fund or a private fund. However, you can deduct
that benefit a political party or political candidate to get information that would be useful in making contributions as taxes if state law requires you to
are not deductible. further investments. make them to a state unemployment fund that
covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy-
ment caused by business conditions.
Professional Accreditation Fees Tax-Exempt Income Expenses
You cannot deduct professional accreditation You cannot deduct expenses to produce Wristwatches
fees such as the following. tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct interest
on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carry You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,• Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini- tax-exempt securities. even if there is a job requirement that you knowtial right to practice accounting. If you have expenses to produce both tax- the correct time to properly perform your duties.
• Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in able and tax-exempt income, but you cannot
securing initial admission to the bar. identify the expenses that produce each type of
income, you must divide the expenses based on• Medical and dental license fees paid to get the amount of each type of income to determineinitial licensing. the amount that you can deduct.
Example. During the year, you received 29.Professional Reputation
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-
You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TV est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had
appearances to increase your personal prestige total expenses of $500 during the year. You
Limit onor establish your professional reputation. cannot identify the amount of each expense item
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80%
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable ItemizedRelief Fund Contributions interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to
You cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri- the 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500). Deductions
vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-
ployee who cannot work because of any injury or
illness not related to the job. Travel Expenses for Another What's NewIndividual
Residential Telephone Service Overall limit expired.  For 2010, the overallYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses
limit on itemized deductions has expired. Underyou pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, orYou cannot deduct any charge (including taxes) current law, the limit on itemized deductions willother individual who accompanies you (or yourfor basic local telephone service for the first resume in 2011 at pre-2006 levels.employee) on business or personal travel. Seetelephone line to your residence, even if it is chapter 26 for more information on deductibleused in a trade or business. travel expenses.
Stockholders' Meetings Voluntary Unemployment
Benefit Fund ContributionsYou cannot deduct transportation and other ex-
penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet- You cannot deduct voluntary unemploymentings of companies in which you own stock but benefit fund contributions you make to a unionhave no other interest. You cannot deduct these
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 201

Page 204 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,900 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions, are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the
earned income credit. Chapter 37 discusses a wide variety of other credits,
Credits such as the adoption credit.
• Foreign earned income exclusion or the • Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- • Credit for employer social security andeign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, Medicare taxes paid on certain employee30. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, and the tips. See Form 8846.Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in
the Form 1040 Instructions.)
Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-How To Figure its, determine whether there are any other taxesCredits. After you figure your income tax and you must pay. This chapter does not explainany alternative minimum tax (discussed later),Your Tax these other taxes. You can find that informationdetermine your tax credits. This chapter does in other chapters of this publication and yournot explain whether you are eligible for these form instructions. See the following table forcredits. You can find that information in chapters other taxes you may need to add to your income32 through 37 and your form instructions. SeeIntroduction tax.the following table for credits you may be able toAfter you have figured your income and deduc- subtract from your income tax.tions as explained in Parts One  through Five, OTHER TAXESyour next step is to figure your tax. This chapter SeeCREDITSdiscusses: For information on: chapter:See
• The general steps you take to figure your For information on: chapter: Additional taxes on qualified retirement
tax, plans and IRAs ............. . 10, 17Adoption ................. . 37 Advance earned income credit• An additional tax you may have to pay Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 37 payments ................ . 36Alternative fuel vehicle refueling called the alternative minimum tax, and Household employment taxes .... . 32property ................ . 37 Recapture of an education credit .. . 35• The conditions you must meet if you want Child and dependent care ..... . 32 Social security and Medicare tax onthe IRS to figure your tax. Child tax credit ............. . 34 wages ................... . 5Credit to holders of tax credit bonds 37 Social security and Medicare tax onEducation ................ . 35 tips ..................... . 6Figuring Your Tax Elderly or disabled .......... . 33 Uncollected social security andElectric vehicle credits ........ . 37 Medicare tax on tips ......... . 6Your income tax is based on your taxable in- Foreign tax ............... . 37
come. After you figure your income tax and any Mortgage interest ........... . 37 Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-alternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred- Prior year minimum tax ....... . 37 native minimum tax, is discussed later in thisits and add any other taxes you may owe. The Residential energy .......... . 37 chapter.Retirement savings result is your total tax. Compare your total tax
There are other taxes that are not discussedcontributions ............. . 37with your total payments to determine whether
in this publication. These include the followingyou are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. Some credits (such as the earned income items.This section provides a general outline of credit) are not listed above because they arehow to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step treated as payments. See Payments, later. 1. Self-employment tax. You must figure thisdirections in the Instructions for Forms 1040EZ, There are other credits that are not dis- tax if either of the following applies to you1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax cussed in this publication. These include the (or your spouse if you file a joint return).form you should file, see Which Form Should I following credits.Use? in chapter 1. a. Your net earnings from• General business credit, which is made up self-employment from other than churchof several separate business-related cred-Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table employee income were $400 or more.its. These generally are reported on Formor the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure The term ªnet earnings from3800, General Business Credit, and aretheir income tax. However, there are special self-employmentº may include certaindiscussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334,methods if your income includes any of the fol- nonemployee compensation and otherTax Guide for Small Business.lowing items. amounts reported to you on Form
1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. If• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.)
you received a Form 1099-MISC, seenity employment credit. See Form 8844.• Qualified dividends taxed at the same the Instructions for Recipients on the• District of Columbia first-time homebuyerrates as a net capital gain. (See chapters back. Also see the Instructions forcredit. See Form 8859.8 and 16.) Schedule SE (Form 1040),
Self-Employment Tax; and Publication• Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.)
334, Tax Guide for Small Business.6478.• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule
b. You had church employee income of• Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In-J (Form 1040), Income Averaging for
$108.28 or more.dian coal production credit for electricityFarmers and Fishermen.)
and refined coal produced at facilities• Investment income over $1,900 for certain 2. Recapture taxes. You may have to payplaced in service after October 22, 2004,children. (See chapter 31.) these taxes if you previously claimed anand Indian coal produced at facilities
investment credit, a District of Columbia• Parents' election to report child's interest placed in service after August 8, 2005.
first-time homebuyer credit, a low-incomeand dividends. (See chapter 31.) See Form 8835, Part II.
Page 202 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 205 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
housing credit, a new markets credit, a group in which you were an officer, direc- have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax
tor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in- through an additional tax. This additional tax isqualified plug-in electric vehicle credit, an
formation, see the instructions for Form called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).alternative motor vehicle credit, a credit for
1040, line 60. You may have to pay the AMT if your taxableemployer-provided child care facilities, an
income for regular tax purposes, combined withIndian employment credit, or other credits 11. Additional tax on income you received certain adjustments and tax preference items, islisted in the instructions for Form 1040, line from a nonqualified deferred compensation more than a certain amount. See Form 6251,60. For more information, see the instruc- plan that fails to meet certain require- Alternative Minimum Tax Ð Individuals.tions for Form 1040, line 60. ments. This income should be shown in
Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If Adjustments and tax preference items. The1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa-you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi- more common adjustments and tax preferencetion, see the instructions for Form 1040,ness and you received a distribution that items include:line 60.exceeds the benefits provided for you • Addition of personal exemptions,under the qualified pension or annuity plan 12. Interest on the tax due on installment in-
come from the sale of certain residential • Addition of the standard deduction (ifformula, you may have to pay this addi-
lots and timeshares. For more information, claimed),tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in
see the instructions for Form 1040, line 60.chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement • Addition of itemized deductions claimedPlans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, 13. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from for state and local taxes, certain interest,
and Qualified Plans). certain installment sales with a sales price most miscellaneous deductions, and part
over $150,000. For more information, see of medical expenses,4. Uncollected social security and Medicare
the instructions for Form 1040, line 60.tax on group-term life insurance. If your • Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-
former employer provides you with more cal taxes included in gross income,
than $50,000 of group-term life insurance Payments. After you determine your total tax, • Changes to accelerated depreciation offigure the total payments you have alreadycoverage, you must pay the employee part certain property,made for the year. Include credits that areof social security and Medicare taxes on
treated as payments. This chapter does not ex-those premiums. The amount should be • Difference between gain or loss on the
plain these payments and credits. You can find sale of property reported for regular taxshown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with
that information in other chapters of this publica- purposes and AMT purposes,codes M and N.
tion and your form instructions. See the follow- • Addition of certain income from incentive5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This ing table for amounts you can include in your stock options,tax applies if you received an ªexcess par- total payments.
achute paymentº (EPP) due to a change in • Change in certain passive activity loss de-PAYMENTSa corporation's ownership or control. The ductions,Seeamount should be shown in box 12 of your For information on: chapter: • Addition of certain depletion that is moreForm W-2 with code K. See the instruc- than the adjusted basis of the property,Child tax credit (additional) ..... . 34tions for Form 1040, line 60.
Earned income credit ........ . 36 • Addition of part of the deduction for certain6. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. Estimated tax paid .......... . 4 intangible drilling costs, andThis applies if you are the beneficiary of a Excess social security 
and RRTA tax withheld ...... . 37trust that accumulated its income instead • Addition of tax-exempt interest on certain
Federal income tax withheld .... . 4of distributing it currently. See the Instruc- private activity bonds.
First-time homebuyer credit .... . 37tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation
Health coverage tax credit ..... . 37Distribution of Trusts. More information. For more informationMaking work pay credit ....... . 37
about the AMT, see the instructions for Form7. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If Regulated investment company 
1040, line 45, and Form 6251.credit .................. . 37amounts contributed to, or distributed from,
Refundable credit foryour health savings account or medical
prior year minimum tax ...... .  37savings account do not meet the rules for
Tax paid with extension ....... . 1these accounts, you may have to pay addi-
tional taxes. See Publication 969, Health Another credit that is treated as a payment is Tax Figured by IRS
Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.
Health Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs If you file by April 18, 2011, you can have theThis credit is for persons who have a nontaxable
IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,use of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andand Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts;
Form 1040A, or Form 1040.kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 70.Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts
See Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid on If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes
Fuels. much, you will receive a refund. If you did noton Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and
pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-Other Tax-Favored Accounts. Refund or balance due. To determine ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for late8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap- whether you are entitled to a refund or owe payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days ofplies if amounts contributed to, or distrib- additional tax, compare your total payments with the date of the bill or by the due date for youruted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see return, whichever is later.
the rules for these accounts. See Publica- your form instructions for information on having
tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and it directly deposited into one or more of your When the IRS cannot figure your tax. The
accounts instead of receiving a paper check.Form 5329. IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the
following apply.9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro-
grams. This applies to amounts distributed 1. You want your refund directly deposited
from qualified tuition programs that do not into your accounts.Alternativemeet the rules for these accounts. See
2. You want any part of your refund appliedPublication 970 and Form 5329.
Minimum Tax to your 2011 estimated tax.
10. Excise tax on insider stock compensation
3. You had income for the year from sourcesfrom an expatriated corporation. You may This section briefly discusses an additional tax other than wages, salaries, tips, interest,owe a 15% excise tax on the value of non- you may have to pay. dividends, taxable social security benefits,statutory stock options and certain other The tax law gives special treatment to some unemployment compensation, IRA distri-stock-based compensation held by you or kinds of income and allows special deductions butions, pensions, and annuities.a member of your family from an expatri- and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-
ated corporation or its expanded affiliated ers who benefit from the law in these ways may 4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 203

Page 206 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. You itemize deductions. Earned income credit. If you can take this through 77. Do not fill in lines 53, box ªcº, if you
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS can are completing Schedule R, 63, and 64a if you6. You file any of the following forms. figure it for you. Enter ªEICº in the space to the want the IRS to figure the credits shown on
left of line 9a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay those lines.a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
you elect to include in earned income on line 9b. Fill in any forms or schedules asked for on
b. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income If your credit for any year after 1996 was the lines you completed, and attach them to your
Exclusion. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also return.
have to file Form 8862, Information To Claimc. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withcare Tax on Unreported Tip Income. held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or theyour return. For details, see the Form 1040EZ appropriate box of Form 1099, on line 61. Enterd. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri- Instructions. any estimated tax payments you made onbution of Trusts.
line 62.e. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu-
Form 1040A Line Entriestions. Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-f. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441 andapply to you. If you are filing a joint return, useg. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ attach it to your return. Enter the amount of thethe space to the left of the entry space for line 27Individuals. credit on line 48. The IRS will not figure thisto separately show your taxable income and credit.h. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. your spouse's taxable income. Do not complete
line 28. Complete lines 29 through 33, 36, and Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youi. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children 38 through 43 if they apply to you. Do not fill in can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,Who Have Investment Income of More lines 30, 41a, and 43 if you want the IRS to figure attach Schedule R to your return, check box ªcºThan $1,900. the credits shown on those lines. Also, enter any and enter ªCFEº on the line next to line 53. The
j. Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report write-in information that applies to you in the IRS will figure the credit for you. On Schedule R
Child's Interest and Dividends. space to the left of line 44. Do not complete lines check the box in Part I for your filing status and
34, 35, 37, and 45 through 49. age. Complete Part II and Part III, lines 11 andk. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- 13, if they apply.penses. Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
Earned income credit. If you can take thisheld that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or thel. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and
credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willappropriate box of Form 1099, on line 38. EnterLong-Term Care Insurance Contracts. figure it for you. Enter ªEICº on the dotted lineany estimated tax payments you made on
m. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts next to Form 1040, line 64a. Enter the nontax-line 39.
(HSAs). able combat pay you elect to include in earned
Credit for child and dependent care ex- income on line 64b. If you have a qualifyingn. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Security penses. If you can take this credit, as dis- child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach itand Medicare Tax on Wages. cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441, to your return.
Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-o. Form 8930, Qualified Disaster Recov- If your credit for any year after 1996 was
tach it to your return. Enter the amount of theery Assistance Retirement Plan Distri- reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
credit on line 29. The IRS will not figure thisbutions and Repayments. have to file Form 8862 with your return. For
credit. details, see the Form 1040 Instructions.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you
Filing the Return can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,
attach Schedule R (Form 1040), Credit for the
After you complete the line entries for the tax Elderly or the Disabled. Enter ªCFEº in the space
form you are filing, fill in your name and address. to the left of line 30. The IRS will figure this credit
Enter your social security number in the space for you. On Schedule R, check the box in Part I 31.provided. If you are married, enter the social for your filing status and age. Complete Part II
security numbers of you and your spouse even if and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.
you file separately. Complete the ªThird Party
Earned income credit. If you can take thisDesigneeº area of the return if you would like Tax oncredit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willanother person to discuss your return with the
figure it for you. Enter ªEICº to the left of the entryIRS. Sign and date your return and enter your
space for line 41a. Enter the nontaxable combatoccupation(s). If you are filing a joint return, both Investment
pay you elect to include in earned income on lineyou and your spouse must sign it. Enter your
41b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill indaytime phone number in the space provided. Income ofSchedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to tach it to your return.your return. Also attach any Form 1099-R you If your credit for any year after 1996 wasreceived that has withholding tax in box 4. Certain Childrenreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoMail your return to the Internal Revenue have to file Form 8862, Information To ClaimService Center for the area where you live. A list Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withof Service Center addresses is shown near the your return. For details, see the Form 1040A Introductionend of this publication. Instructions. This chapter discusses the following two rules
that may affect the tax on investment income of
certain children.Form 1040EZ Line Entries Form 1040 Line Entries
1. If the child's interest and dividend incomeRead lines 1 through 9b and fill in the lines that Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines that (including capital gain distributions) totalapply to you. Do not complete lines 10 through apply to you. Do not complete line 44. less than $9,500, the child's parent may be13. If you are filing a joint return, use the space If you are filing a joint return, use the space able to choose to include that income onto the left of line 6 to separately show your under the words ªAdjusted Gross Incomeº on the parent's return rather than file a returntaxable income and your spouse's taxable in- line 37 on the front of your return to separately for the child. (See Parent's Election To Re-come. show your taxable income and your spouse's port Child's Interest and Dividends, later.)taxable income.
Payments. Enter any federal income tax with- Read lines 45 through 71. Fill in the lines that 2. If the child's interest, dividends, and other
held on line 7. Federal income tax withheld is apply to you, but do not fill in lines 54, 60, and investment income total more than $1,900,
shown on Form W-2, box 2. 72. Also, do not complete line 55 and lines 73 part of that income may be taxed at the
Page 204 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 207 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
parent's tax rate instead of the child's tax that joint return. Do not use the return of the full-time student at a school, or took a full-time,
rate. (See Tax for Certain Children Who noncustodial parent. on-farm training course given by a school or a
Have Investment Income of More Than If the custodial parent and the stepparent are state, county, or local government agency. A
$1,900, later.) married, but file separate returns, use the return school includes a technical, trade, or mechani-
of the one with the greater taxable income. If the cal school. It does not include an on-the-jobFor these rules, the term ªchildº includes a le- custodial parent and the stepparent are married training course, correspondence school, orgally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules but not living together, the earlier discussion school offering courses only through the In-apply whether or not the child is a dependent. under Parents not living together applies. ternet.
Parents never married. If a child's parents How to make the election. Make the electionUseful Items
have never been married to each other, but lived by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040. (IfYou may want to see: together all year, use the return of the parent you make this election, you cannot file Form
with the greater taxable income. If the parents 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Attach a separatePublication did not live together all year, the rules explained Form 8814 for each child for whom you make
❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and earlier under Parents are divorced apply. the election. You can make the election for one
Dependents or more children and not for others.Widowed parent remarried. If a widow or
widower remarries, the new spouse is treated asForm (and Instructions) Effect of Making thethe child's other parent. The rules explained
❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply. ElectionInvestment Income of More Than
$1,900 The federal income tax on your child's income
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's
tion.Interest and Dividends Parent's Election
Rate may be higher. If your child receivedTo Report Child's qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
you may pay up to $95 more tax if you make thisInterest and Dividends election instead of filing a separate tax return forWhich Parent's the child. This is because the tax rate on theYou may be able to elect to include your child's child's income between $950 and $1,900 is 10%Return To Use interest and dividend income (including capital if you make this election. However, if you file again distributions) on your tax return. If you do, separate return for the child, the tax rate may beIf a child's parents are married to each other and your child will not have to file a return. as low as 0% (zero percent) because of thefile a joint return, use the joint return to figure the You can make this election only if all the preferential tax rates for qualified dividends andtax on the child's investment income. The tax following conditions are met. capital gain distributions.rate and other return information from that return • Your child was under age 19 (or underare used to figure the child's tax as explained Deductions you cannot take. By making theage 24 if a full-time student) at the end oflater under Tax for Certain Children Who Have Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of thethe year.Investment Income of More Than $1,900. following deductions that the child would be enti-
• Your child had income only from interest tled to on his or her return.
and dividends (including capital gain distri-Parents Who Do Not File a • The additional standard deduction if thebutions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi- child is blind.Joint Return dends).
• The deduction for a penalty on an early• The child's gross income was less thanFor parents who do not file a joint return, the withdrawal of your child's savings.$9,500.following discussions explain which parent's tax
• Itemized deductions (such as your child'sreturn must be used to figure the tax. • The child is required to file a return unless investment expenses or charitable contri-Only the parent whose tax return is used can you make this election. butions).make the election described under Parent's • The child does not file a joint return for theElection To Report Child's Interest and Divi- year.dends. Reduced deductions or credits. If you use
• No estimated tax payment was made for Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
Parents are married. If the child's parents file the year, and no overpayment from the come may reduce certain deductions or credits
separate returns, use the return of the parent previous year (or from any amended re- on your return including the following.
with the greater taxable income. turn) was applied to this year under your • Deduction for contributions to a traditionalchild's name and social security number.Parents not living together. If the child's individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
parents are married to each other but not living • No federal income tax was taken out of • Deduction for student loan interest.together, and the parent with whom the child your child's income under the backup with-
lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar- holding rules. • Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If the casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-• You are the parent whose return must becustodial parent is not considered unmarried, cellaneous expenses.used when applying the special tax rulesuse the return of the parent with the greater for children. (See Which Parent's Return • Total itemized deductions.taxable income. To Use, earlier.) • Personal exemptions.For an explanation of when a married person
These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.living apart from his or her spouse is considered • Credit for child and dependent care ex-unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2. penses.Certain January 1 birthdays. A child born on
January 1, 1992, is considered to be age 19 atParents are divorced. If the child's parents • Child tax credit.
the end of 2010. You cannot make this electionare divorced or legally separated, and the parent • Education tax credits.for such a child unless the child was a full-timewho had custody of the child for the greater part
student.of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar- • Earned income credit.
A child born on January 1, 1987, is consid-ried, use the return of the custodial parent. • Making work pay credit.ered to be age 24 at the end of 2010. You cannotCustodial parent remarried. If the custo- make this election for such a child. • First-time homebuyer credit.dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather
than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the Full-time student. A full-time student is a
child's other parent. Therefore, if the custodial child who during some part of each of any 5 Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
parent and the stepparent file a joint return, use calendar months of the year was enrolled as a If you make this election for 2010 and did not
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 205

Page 208 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2011, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information. 
Figuring Child's Income
Use Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child's
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,900 is added to
your income. The amount over $1,900 is shown
on Form 8814, line 6. Unless the child's income
includes qualified dividends or capital gain distri-
butions (discussed next), the same amount is
shown on Form 8814, line 12. Include the
amount from Form 8814, line 12, on Form 1040,
line 21. Enter ªForm 8814º on the dotted line
next to line 21. If you file more than one Form
8814, include the total amounts from line 12 of
all your Forms 8814 on Form 1040, line 21.
Capital gain distributions and qualified divi-
dends. If your child's dividend income in-
cluded any capital gain distributions, see Capital
gain distributions under Figuring Child's Income
in Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child's divi-
dend income included any qualified dividends,
see Qualified dividends under Figuring Child's
Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Use Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the
$1,900 of your child's interest and dividends that
you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
1. 10% ×  (your child's gross income − $950),
or
2. $95.
Include the amount from line 15 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44.
Check box a on Form 1040, line 44.
Illustrated Example
David and Linda Parks are married and will file
separate tax returns for 2010. Their only child,
Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT
showing $1,650 taxable interest income and a
Form 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi-
dends. All the dividends were qualified divi-
dends. His parents decide to include that
income on one of their returns so they will not
have to file a return for Philip.
First, David and Linda each figure their tax-
able income (Form 1040, line 43) without regard
to Philip's income. David's taxable income is
$56,700 and Linda's is $74,300. Because her
taxable income is greater, Linda can elect to
include Philip's income on her return. See Which
Parent's Return To Use, earlier.
On Form 8814 (see  illustrated form ), Linda
enters her name and social security number,
then Philip's name and social security number.
She enters Philip's taxable interest income,
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 19 at the end
of 2010?
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2010 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$9,500?
/H17074
No
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2010?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2009 return (or on any
amended return) applied to the 2010
estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income under backup
withholding rules?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is your child filing a joint return for 2010?
/H17074
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Yes
Was your child under age 24 at the end
of 2010?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
Was your child a full-time student in
2010?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
$1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt
interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.
She enters Philip's ordinary dividends, $1,150,
on line 2a. All of Philip's ordinary dividends were
qualified dividends, so Linda also enters $1,150
Page 206 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 209 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on line 2b. Philip did not have any capital gain
distributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
Linda adds lines 1a and 2a and enters the
result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had
qualified dividends, Linda must complete lines 7
through 11 of Form 8814. She includes the
amount from line 9 of Form 8814 ($370) on lines
9a and 9b of her Form 1040. On the dotted lines
next to lines 9a and 9b, she enters ªForm
8814±$370.º
Linda includes $530 in the total on line 21 of
her Form 1040 (not illustrated) and in the space
next to that line writes ªForm 8814 ±$530.º Ad-
ding that amount, plus the $370 of qualified
dividends, to her income increases each of the
amounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of her
Form 1040 by $900. Linda is not claiming any
deductions that are affected by the increase to
her income. Therefore, her revised taxable in-
come on line 43 is $75,200 ($74,300 + $370 +
$530).
On Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $950
shown on line 13 from the $2,800 on line 4 and
enters the result, $1,850, on line 14. Because
that amount is not less than $950, she enters
$95 on line 15. This is the tax on the first $1,900
of Philip's income, which Linda did not have to
add to her income. She must add this additional
tax to the tax figured on her revised taxable
income.
The tax on her $75,200 revised taxable in-
come, figured using the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040
instructions, is $15,129. She adds $95, and en-
ters the $15,224 total on Form 1040, line 44, and
checks box a.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.
Tax for Certain
Children Who Have
Investment Income of
More Than $1,900
If a child's interest, dividends, and other invest-
ment income total more than $1,900, part of that
income may be taxed at the parent's tax rate
instead of the child's tax rate. If the parent does
not or cannot choose to include the child's in-
come on the parent's return, use Form 8615 to
figure the child's tax. Attach the completed form
to the child's Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
When Form 8615 must be filed. Form 8615
must be filed for a child if all of the following
statements are true.
1. The child's investment income was more
than $1,900.
2. The child is required to file a return for
2010.
3. The child either:
a. Was under age 18 at the end of the
year,
b. Was age 18 at the end of the year and
did not have earned income that was
more than half of his or her support, or
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,900?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2010?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is the child filing a joint return for 2010?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2010?
/H17074
No
Was the child age 18 at the end of 2010?
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2010?
No
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Was the child a full-time student in 2010?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
Did the child have earned income that was more than
half of his or her support?
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Was at least one of the child’s parents alive at the end
of 2010?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075/H17075
/H17075
c. Was a full-time student over age 18 and
under age 24 at the end of the year and
did not have earned income that was
more than half of his or her support.
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 207

Page 210 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
June 22, 2010
Form 8814 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99)
Parents' Election To Report  
Child's Interest and Dividends
a See instructions.  
a Attach to parents' Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 40
Name(s) shown on your return Your social security number
Caution. The federal income tax on your child’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain distributions, may be less if you 
file a separate tax return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax benefits that your 
child could take on his or her own return. For details, see Tax benefits you cannot take on page 2. 
A   Child's name (first, initial, and last) B   Child’s social security number 
C   If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here .....................  a
Part I Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return 
1 a Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the 
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions ............  1a 
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this amount 
on line 1a ...................  1b 
2 a Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your 
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions ........  2a 
b Enter your child’s qualified dividends included on line 2a. See the 
instructions ..................  2b 
3 Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions 
as a nominee, see the instructions .................... 3 
4 Add lines 1a, 2a, and 3. If the total is $1,900 or less, skip lines 5 through 12 and go to line 13. If
the total is $9,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to 
report the income ..........................  4 
5 Base amount ........................... 5 1,900   00 
6 Subtract line 5 from line 4 .......................  6 
If both lines 2b and 3 are zero or blank, skip lines 7 through 10, enter -0- on line 11, and go 
to line 12. Otherwise, go to line 7. 
7 Divide line 2b by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at 
least three places) ................ 7 .
8 Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at 
least three places) ................  8 .
9 Multiply line 6 by line 7. Enter the result here. See the instructions 
for where to report this amount on your return .......  9 
10 Multiply line 6 by line 8. Enter the result here. See the instructions 
for where to report this amount on your return .......  10 
11 Add lines 9 and 10 ..........................  11 
12 Subtract line 11 from line 6. Include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or Form 
1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount. If you 
checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Go to line 13 below .......  12 
Part II Tax on the First $1,900 of Child’s Interest and Dividends 
13 Amount not taxed ..........................  13 950  00 
14 Subtract line 13 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0- ........... 14 
15 Tax.  Is the amount on line 14 less than $950? 
No. Enter $95 here and see the Note below. 
Yes. Multiply line 14 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below. } ... 15 
Note.  If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 15 in the tax you enter 
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 42. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 42. 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 10750J Form 8814 (2010) 
Linda Parks 111-00-1111
Philip Parks 000-00-0000
1,650
1,150
1,150
2,800
900
411
370
370
530
1,850
95
Page 208 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 211 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. At least one of the child's parents was 8615, enter ªEstimatedº on the line next to the • Net capital gains Ð $100
alive at the end of 2010. amount. The dividends were qualified dividends on stockWhen you get the correct information, file an5. The child does not file a joint return for given to her by her grandparents.amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S.2010. Amanda's investment income is $1,900. ThisIndividual Income Tax Return.
These conditions are also shown in Figure is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter-Instead of using estimates, you can get an
31-B. est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Herautomatic 6-month extension of time to file if, by
wages are earned (not investment) income be-the date your return is due, you file Form 4868,Earned income. Earned income includes cause they are received for work actually done.Application for Automatic Extension of Time Towages, tips, and other payments received for Her tax-exempt interest is not included becauseFile U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Exten-personal services performed. It does not include it is nontaxable.sions are discussed in chapter 1.investment income as defined later in this chap-
Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary ofter.
a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-Step 1. Figuring theSupport. Your child's support includes all dends, capital gains, and other investment in-amounts spent to provide the child with food, Child's Net Investment come from the trust are investment income tolodging, clothing, education, medical and dental the child.Incomecare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- However, for purposes of completing Formcessities. To figure your child's support, count (Form 8615, Part I) 8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified disa-support provided by you, your child, and others. bility trust is considered earned income, not in-The first step in figuring a child's tax using FormHowever, a scholarship received by your child is vestment income.8615 is to figure the child's net investment in-not considered support if your child is a full-time
come. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I. Line 2 (deductions). If the child does notstudent. See chapter 3 for details about support.
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040),Certain January 1 birthdays. Use the follow- Line 1 (investment income). If the child had enter $1,900 on line 2.ing chart to determine whether certain children no earned income, enter on this line the adjusted If the child does itemize deductions, enter onwith January 1 birthdays meet condition 3 under gross income shown on the child's return. Ad- line 2 the larger of:When Form 8615 must be filed. justed gross income is shown on Form 1040,
1. $950 plus the portion of the child's item-line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22. Form 1040EZ
IF a child was THEN, at the end ized deductions on Schedule A (Formcannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed.
born on... of 2010, the child 1040), line 29, that are directly connectedIf the child had earned income, figure the
with the production of investment incomeis considered to amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by using
entered on line 1, orbe... the worksheet in the instructions for the form.
However, if the child has excluded any for- 2. $1,900.January 1, 1993 18* eign earned income or deducted either a loss
from self-employment or a net operating lossJanuary 1, 1992 19** Directly connected. Itemized deductions
from another year, use the Alternate Worksheet are directly connected with the production ofJanuary 1, 1987 24*** for Form 8615, Line 1, in Publication 929 to investment income if they are for expenses paid
figure the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1. to produce or collect taxable income or to man-*This child is not under age 18. The child
age, conserve, or maintain property held formeets condition 3 only if the child did not Investment income defined. Investment
producing income. These expenses includehave earned income that was more than half income is generally all income other than sala-
custodian fees and service charges, serviceof the child's support. ries, wages, and other amounts received as pay
fees to collect taxable interest and dividends,**This child meets condition 3 only if the for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-
child was a full-time student who did not and certain investment counsel fees.est, dividends (including capital gain distribu-have earned income that was more than half These expenses are added to certain othertions), capital gains, the taxable part of socialof the child's support. miscellaneous itemized deductions on Schedulesecurity and pension payments, and certain dis-***Do not use Form 8615 for this child. A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater thantributions from trusts. Investment income in-
2% of the child's adjusted gross income can becludes amounts produced by assets the child
deducted. See chapter 28 for more information.obtained with earned income (such as interest
on a savings account into which the child depos-Providing Parental Example 1. Roger, age 12, has investmentited wages).Information income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust-
Nontaxable income. For this purpose, in- ments to income, and itemized deductions of(Form 8615, lines A±C) vestment income includes only amounts the $300 (net of the 2% limit) that are directly con-
child must include in total income. Nontaxable nected with his investment income. His adjustedOn Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent's investment income, such as tax-exempt interest gross income is $8,000, which is entered onname and social security number. (If the parents and the nontaxable part of social security and Form 1040, line 38, and on Form 8615, line 1.filed a joint return, enter the name and social pension payments, is not included. Line 2 is $1,900 because that is more than thesecurity number listed first on the joint return.)
sum of $950 and his directly-connected itemizedOn line C, check the box for the parent's filing Income from property received as a gift.
deductions of $300.status. A child's investment income includes all income
See Which Parent's Return To Use  at the produced by property belonging to the child.
Example 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investmentbeginning of this chapter for information on This is true even if the property was transferred
income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-which parent's return information must be used to the child, regardless of when the property was
alty of $100. She has no other income. She hason Form 8615. transferred or purchased or who transferred it.
itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2%A child's investment income includes incomeParent with different tax year. If the parent limit) that are directly connected with the produc-produced by property given as a gift to the child.and the child do not have the same tax year, tion of her investment income. Her adjustedThis includes gifts to the child from grandparentscomplete Form 8615 using the information on gross income, entered on line 1, is $15,900or any other person and gifts made under thethe parent's return for the tax year that ends in ($16,000 − $100). The amount on line 2 isUniform Gift to Minors Act.the child's tax year. $2,000. This is the larger of:
Parent's return information not known Example. Amanda Black, age 13, received 1. $950 plus the $1,050 of directly connectedtimely. If the information needed from the par- the following income. itemized deductions, orent's return is not known by the time the child's • Dividends Ð $600 2. $1,900.return is due (usually April 15), you can file the
return using estimates. • Wages Ð $2,100
You can use any reasonable estimate. This Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the• Taxable interest Ð $1,200includes using information from last year's re- result on this line. If zero or less, do not complete
turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form • Tax-exempt interest Ð $100 the rest of the form. However, you must still
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 209

Page 212 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
attach Form 8615 to the child's tax return. Figure Line 7 of Sharon's Form 8615 will show files Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax in
the tax on the child's taxable income in the $1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 of Publication 929.
normal manner. Jerry's and Mike's Forms 8615.
Line 7 of Jerry's Form 8615 will show $1,800 Illustrated ExampleLine 4 (child's taxable income). Enter on line ($800 + $1,000).4 the child's taxable income from Form 1040, The following example includes a completedLine 7 of Mike's Form 8615 will show $1,400line 43, or Form 1040A, line 27. ($800 + $600). Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown.However, if the child files Form 2555 or
John and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.2555-EZ to claim the foreign earned income Other children's information not available.
She is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in-exclusion or housing exclusion, see the Form If the net investment income of the other children
come and $1,500 earned income. She does not8615 instructions. is not available when the return is due, either file
itemize deductions. John and Laura file a jointthe return using estimates or get an extension of
Line 5 (net investment income). A child's net return with John's name and social securitytime to file. See Parent's return information notinvestment income cannot be more than his or number listed first. They claim three exemp-known timely, earlier.her taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5, tions, including an exemption for Sara, on theirthe smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child's return.Line 11 (tentative tax). Subtract line 10 fromnet investment income. line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is the Because Sara is under age 18 and has moreIf zero or less, do not complete the rest of the tentative tax. than $1,900 investment income, part of her in-form. However, you must still attach Form 8615 If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and come may be subject to tax at her parents' rate.to the child's tax return. Figure the tax on the enter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Also A completed Form 8615 must be attached to herchild's taxable income in the normal manner. skip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b that return.
follows. Sara's father, John, fills out Sara's return forStep 2. Figuring Tentative 
her. He completes her Form 1040A through lineLines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentativeTax at the Parent's Tax 27, then begins completing her Form 8615.tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divideRate John enters his name and social securitythe tentative tax shown on line 11 among the
number on Sara's Form 8615 because his name(Form 8615, Part II) children according to each child's share of the
and number are listed first on the joint return hetotal net investment income. This is done on
and Laura are filing. He checks the box forThe next step in completing Form 8615 is to lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7
figure a tentative tax on the child's net invest- married filing jointly.to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on line
ment income at the parent's tax rate. The tenta- 12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amount He enters Sara's investment income,tive tax at the parent's tax rate is the difference on line 12a and enter the result, as a decimal, on $2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc-between the tax on the parent's taxable income line 12b. tions, so John enters $1,900 on line 2. He entersfigured with the child's net investment income $900 ($2,800 − $1,900) on line 3.(plus the net investment income of any other Example. In the earlier example under Line Sara's taxable income on her Form 1040A,child whose Form 8615 includes the tax return 7 (net investment income of other children), line 27, is $2,500. This is her total incomeinformation of that parent) and the tax figured Sharon's Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7. ($4,300) minus her standard deductionwithout it. The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, the ($1,800). Her standard deduction is limited toWhen figuring the tentative tax at the par- total of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 + the amount of her earned income plus $300.ent's tax rate, do not refigure any of the exclu- $1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figured John enters $2,500 on line 4.sions, deductions, or credits on the parent's as follows and rounded to three places.
return because of the child's net investment in- John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters the$800come. For example, do not refigure the medical smaller amount, $900, on line 5.= .333expense deduction. $2,400 John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is the Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, lines taxable income from line 43 of John and Laura's6 through 13.
joint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, soStep 3. Figuring the line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($900), line 6Note. If the child or parent has any capital
($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and entersChild's Tax gains or losses, get Publication 929 for help in
$48,900 on line 8.completing Form 8615, Part II. (Form 8615, Part III)
Using the column for married filing jointly inLine 6 (parent's taxable income). Enter on The final step in figuring a child's tax using Form the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $48,900. Heline 6 the parent's taxable income from Form 8615 is to determine the larger of: enters the tax, $6,501, on line 9. He enters1040, line 43, or Form 1040A, line 27. $6,366 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 ofIf the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet 1. The total of: John and Laura's Form 1040. He enters $135 on(in the Form 1040 instructions) was used to line 11 ($6,501 − $6,366).a. The child's share of the tentative taxfigure the parent's tax, enter the amount from
Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12abased on the parent's tax rate, plusline 3 of that worksheet instead of the parent's
and 12b and enters $135 on line 13.taxable income. b. The tax on the child's taxable income in
John subtracts line 5 ($900) from line 4excess of net investment income, fig-Line 7 (net investment income of other chil- ($2,500) and enters the result, $1,600, on lineured at the child's tax rate, ordren). If the tax return information of the par- 14. Using the column for single filing status inent is also used on any other child's Form 8615, the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,600 and2. The tax on the child's taxable income, fig-enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line enters this tax, $161, on line 15. He adds linesured at the child's tax rate.5 of all the other children's Forms 8615. Do not 13 ($135) and 15 ($161) and enters $296 on lineinclude the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615 This is the child's tax. It is figured on Form 16.being completed. 8615, lines 14 through 18.
Using the column for single filing status in the
Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 (line 4)Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon have Alternative minimum tax. A child may be
and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he or
must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The she has certain items given preferential treat- John compares lines 16 and 17 and enterschildren's net investment income amounts on ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini- the larger amount, $296, on line 18 of Sara'sline 5 of their Forms 8615 are: mum Tax in chapter 30. Form 8615. He also enters that amount on line
For more information on who is liable for 28 of Sara's Form 1040A.• Sharon Ð $800
AMT and how to figure it, see Form 6251, Alter- John also completes Schedule B (Form• Jerry Ð $600 native Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. For informa- 1040A or 1040) for Sara.tion on special limits that apply to a child who  • Mike Ð $1,000
Page 210 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 213 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
November 17, 2010
Form  8615
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99)
Tax for Certain Children Who Have Investment 
Income of More Than $1,900
a Attach only to the child's Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
 a See separate instructions.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 33
Child’s name shown on return Child's social security number 
Before you begin:  If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children for whom Form 8615 must be filed must use the Schedule 
D Tax Worksheet or has income from farming or fishing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It 
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040). 
A  Parent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing. B  Parent’s social security number 
C  Parent’s filing status (check one): 
Single Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
Part I Child’s Net Investment Income 
1 Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions) ............... 1 
2 If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter 
$1,900. Otherwise, see instructions ..................... 2 
3 Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do 
attach it to the child’s return ....................... 3 
4 Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR, 
line 41. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions .......... 4 
5 Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do 
attach it to the child’s return ....................... 5 
Part II Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent 
6 Enter the parent’s  taxable income  from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ, 
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or less, enter -0-. If the parent 
files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions ................. 6
7 Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named above. 
Do not include the amount from line 5 above .................. 7 
8 Add lines 5, 6, and 7 (see instructions) .................... 8 
9 Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions). 
If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... a 9 
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative 
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 11; Form 1040NR, line 42; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not 
include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814 or any tax from recapture of an education credit. If the 
parent files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions. If the Qualified Dividends and Capital 
Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) was used to figure 
the tax, check here ...................... a 10 
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line 
13 and go to Part III .......................... 11 
12a Add lines 5 and 7 ................. . 12a 
b Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places) .... 12b ×   . 
13 Multiply line 11 by line 12b ........................ 13 
Part III Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16. 
14 Subtract line 5 from line 4 .............. . 14 
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... a 15 
16 Add lines 13 and 15 .......................... 16 
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... a 17 
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, 
line  28; or Form 1040NR, line 42. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the  instructions 18 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 64113U Form 8615 (2010) 
Sara L. Brown 117-00-1111
John J. Brown 007-00-0001
✔
2,800
1,900
900
2,500
900
48,000
48,900
6,501
6,366
135
135
1,600
161
296
251
296
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 211

Page 214 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care persons were cared for, the amount you
Expenses exclude or deduct will always be less than
the dollar limit, since the amount you can❏ 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide32. exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. See
Reduced Dollar Limit under How To FigureForm (and Instructions) the Credit, later.)
❏ 2441 Child and Dependent CareChild and These tests are presented in Figure 32-A andExpenses are also explained in detail in this chapter.
❏ Schedule H (Form 1040) HouseholdDependent Care Employment Taxes Qualifying Person Test
❏ W-7 Application for IRS IndividualCredit Your child and dependent care expenses mustTaxpayer Identification Number
be for the care of one or more qualifying per-❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider's sons.Identification and Certification A qualifying person is:Reminders
1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-
Taxpayer identification number needed for dent and who was under age 13 when the
each qualifying person. You must include on care was provided (but see Note later),
Tests To Claimline 2 of Form 2441 the name and taxpayer 2. Your spouse who was not physically oridentification number (generally the social se- mentally able to care for himself or herselfthe Creditcurity number) of each qualifying person. See and lived with you for more than half theTaxpayer identification number under Qualifying year, orTo be able to claim the credit for child andPerson Test, later.
dependent care expenses, you must file Form 3. A person who was not physically or men-You may have to pay employment taxes. If 1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, and tally able to care for himself or herself,you pay someone to come to your home and meet all the following tests. lived with you for more than half the year,care for your dependent or spouse, you may be and either:1. The care must be for one or more qualify-a household employer who has to pay employ-
ing persons who are identified on the formment taxes. Usually, you are not a household a. Was your dependent, or
you use to claim the credit. (See Qualifyingemployer if the person who cares for your de- b. Would have been your dependent ex-Person Test.)pendent or spouse does so at his or her home or cept that:place of business. See Employment Taxes for 2. You (and your spouse if filing jointly) must
Household Employers, later. i. He or she received gross income ofhave earned income during the year.
$3,650 or more,(However, see Rule for student-spouse or
spouse not able to care for self under ii. He or she filed a joint return, orEarned Income Test, later.)
iii. You, or your spouse if filing jointly,Introduction 3. You must pay child and dependent care could be claimed as a dependent onexpenses so you (and your spouse if filingThis chapter discusses the credit for child and someone else's 2010 return.jointly) can work or look for work. (Seedependent care expenses and covers the fol-
Work-Related Expense Test, later.)lowing topics.
4. You must make payments for child and• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. Note. If you are divorced or separated, seedependent care to someone you (and your Child of divorced or separated parents or par-• How to figure the credit. spouse) cannot claim as a dependent. If ents living apart , later, to determine which par-you make payments to your child, he or• How to claim the credit. ent may treat the child as a qualifying person.she cannot be your dependent and must• Employment taxes you may have to pay be age 19 or older by the end of the year. Dependent defined. A dependent is a per-as a household employer. You cannot make payments to: son, other than you or your spouse, for whom
you can claim an exemption. To be your depen-You may be able to claim the credit if you pay a. Your spouse, or dent, a person must be your qualifying child (orsomeone to care for your dependent who is b. The parent of your qualifying person if your qualifying relative).under age 13 or for your spouse or dependent your qualifying person is your child andwho is not able to care for himself or herself. The Qualifying child. To be your qualifyingunder age 13.credit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To child, a child must live with you for more thanqualify, you must pay these expenses so you (See Payments to Relatives or Depen- half the year and meet other requirements.can work or look for work. dents under Work-Related Expense Test , More information. For more informationlater.)This credit should not be confused with about who is a dependent or a qualifying child,the child tax credit discussed in chapter 5. Your filing status must be single, head of see chapter 3.34. household, qualifying widow(er) with de-
CAUTION
!
pendent child, or married filing jointly. You Physically or mentally not able to care for
must file a joint return if you are married, oneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, orDependent care benefits. If you received any
unless an exception applies to you. (See feed themselves because of physical or mentaldependent care benefits from your employer
Joint Return Test, later.) problems are considered not able to care forduring the year, you may be able to exclude from
themselves. Also, persons who must have con-your income all or part of them. You must com- 6. You must identify the care provider on your stant attention to prevent them from injuringplete Part III of Form 2441 before you can figure tax return. (See Provider Identification themselves or others are considered not able tothe amount of your credit. See Dependent Care Test, later.) care for themselves.Benefits under How To Figure the Credit, later.
7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care
benefits provided by a dependent care Person qualifying for part of year. You de-Useful Items benefits plan, the total amount you exclude termine a person's qualifying status each day.You may want to see: or deduct must be less than the dollar limit For example, if the person for whom you pay
for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000 child and dependent care expenses no longerPublication if one qualifying person was cared for or qualifies on September 16, count only those
❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, $6,000 if two or more qualifying persons expenses through September 15. Also see
and Filing Information were cared for). (If two or more qualifying Yearly Limit under Dollar Limit, later.
Page 212 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 215 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying person who is your qualifying child and under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you pay expenses for more than one
qualifying person?
You may be able to claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out Form 2441.
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2009, except that you did not pay them until 2010, you may be able to claim those expenses in 2010.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Are you excluding or deducting at least $3,000 of
dependent care benefits?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074No
/H17074
/H17075
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

Page 216 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Birth or death of otherwise qualifying per- Generally, only taxable compensation is in- Work-Related Expenseson. In determining whether a person is a cluded. However, you can elect to include non-
Testqualifying person, a person who was born or taxable combat pay in earned income. If you are
died in 2010 is treated as having lived with you filing a joint return and both you and your spouse Child and dependent care expenses must befor all of 2010 if your home was the person's received nontaxable combat pay, you can each work-related to qualify for the credit. Expenseshome the entire time he or she was alive in make your own election. You should figure your are considered work-related only if both of the2010. credit both ways and make the election if it gives following are true.you a greater tax benefit.Taxpayer identification number. You must • They allow you (and your spouse if filingMembers of certain religious faiths op-include on your return the name and taxpayer jointly) to work or look for work.posed to social security. Certain incomeidentification number (generally the social se-
• They are for a qualifying person's care.earned by persons who are members of certaincurity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the
religious faiths that are opposed to participationcorrect information is not shown, the credit may
in Social Security Act programs and have anbe reduced or disallowed. Working or Looking for WorkIRS-approved form that exempts certain incomeIndividual taxpayer identification number from social security and Medicare taxes may not To be work-related, your expenses must allow(ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying person is a be considered earned income for this purpose. you to work or look for work. If you are married,nonresident or resident alien who does not have See Earned Income Test in Publication 503. generally both you and your spouse must workand cannot get a social security number (SSN), or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-use that person's ITIN. The ITIN is entered ing during any month he or she is a full-timeNot earned income. Earned income does notwherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. student or is not physically or mentally able toinclude:To apply for an ITIN, see Form W-7. care for himself or herself.An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle • Pensions and annuities, Your work can be for others or in your ownthe holder to social security benefits or change business or partnership. It can be either full time• Social security and railroad retirementthe holder's employment or immigration status or part time.benefits,under U.S. law. Work also includes actively looking for work.• Workers' compensation, However, if you do not find a job and have noAdoption taxpayer identification number
earned income for the year, you cannot take this(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who • Interest and dividends,
credit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.was placed in your home for adoption and for • Unemployment compensation, An expense is not considered work-relatedwhom you do not have an SSN, you must get an
merely because you had it while you were work-ATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application • Scholarship or fellowship grants, except
ing. The purpose of the expense must be tofor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending for those reported on a Form W-2 and
allow you to work. Whether your expenses allowU.S. Adoptions. paid to you for teaching or other services,
you to work or look for work depends on the• Nontaxable workfare payments, facts.Child of divorced or separated parents or
parents living apart. Even if you cannot claim • Child support payments received by you,
Example 1. The cost of a babysitter whileyour child as a dependent, he or she is treated • Income of nonresident aliens that is not you and your spouse go out to eat is not nor-as your qualifying person if: effectively connected with a U.S. trade or mally a work-related expense.• The child was under age 13 or was not business, or
physically or mentally able to care for him- Example 2. You work during the day. Your• Any amount received for work while anself or herself, spouse works at night and sleeps during theinmate in a penal institution.
day. You pay for care of your 5-year-old child• The child received over half of his or her
during the hours when you are working and yoursupport during the calendar year from one Rule for student-spouse or spouse not able spouse is sleeping. Your expenses are consid-or both parents who are divorced or legally to care for self. Your spouse is treated as ered work-related.separated under a decree of divorce or
having earned income for any month that he orseparate maintenance, are separated
Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you areshe is:under a written separation agreement, or
not considered to be working if you do unpaidlived apart at all times during the last 6 1. A full-time student, or volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominalmonths of the calendar year,
salary.2. Physically or mentally not able to care for• The child was in the custody of one or himself or herself. (Your spouse also mustboth parents for more than half the year, Work for part of year. If you work or activelylive with you for more than half the year.)and look for work during only part of the period cov-
ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourFigure the earned income of the nonworking• You were the child's custodial parent (the expenses for each day. For example, if you workspouse described under (1) or (2) above asparent with whom the child lived for the all year and pay care expenses of $250 a monthexplained under Earned Income Limit, later.greater part of 2010). ($3,000 for the year), all the expenses areThis rule applies to only one spouse for any
work-related. However, if you work or look forone month. If, in the same month, both you andThe noncustodial parent cannot treat the child work for only 2 months and 15 days during theyour spouse do not work and are either full-timeas a qualifying person even if that parent is year and pay expenses of $250 a month, yourstudents or not physically or mentally able toentitled to claim the child as a dependent under work-related expenses are limited to $625 (2 1/2care for yourselves, only one of you can bethe special rules for a child of divorced or sepa- months ×  $250).treated as having earned income in that month. rated parents.
Temporary absence from work. You do notFull-time student. You are a full-time stu-
have to figure your expenses for each day dur-Earned Income Test dent if you are enrolled at a school for the num-
ing a short, temporary absence from work, suchber of hours or classes that the school considers
as for vacation or a minor illness, if you have toTo claim the credit, you (and your spouse if filing full time. You must have been a full-time student
pay for care anyway. Instead, you can figurejointly) must have earned income during the for some part of each of 5 calendar months
your credit including the expenses you paid foryear. during the year. (The months need not be con-
the period of absence.secutive.)Earned income. Earned income includes An absence of 2 weeks or less is a short,
School. The term ªschoolº includes highwages, salaries, tips, other taxable employee temporary absence. An absence of more than 2
schools, colleges, universities, and technical,compensation, and net earnings from weeks may be considered a short, temporary
trade, and mechanical schools. A school doesself-employment. A net loss from absence, depending on the circumstances.
not include an on-the-job training course, corre-self-employment reduces earned income.
Earned income also includes strike benefits and spondence school, or school offering courses Example. You pay a nanny to care for your
any disability pay you report as wages. only through the Internet. 2-year-old son and 4-year-old daughter so you
Page 214 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 217 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can work. You become ill and miss 4 months of time. Only the part of the boarding school ex- In this chapter, the term housekeeper refers
work but receive sick pay. You continue to pay pense that is for the care of your child is a to any household employee whose services in-
the nanny to care for the children while you are work-related expense. You can count that part clude the care of a qualifying person.
ill. Your absence is not a short, temporary ab- of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you paysence, and your expenses are not considered separated from the cost of education. You can- on wages for qualifying child and dependentwork-related. not count any part of the amount you pay the care services are work-related expenses. Seeschool for your child's education. Employment Taxes for Household Employers ,Part-time work. If you work part-time, you
later.generally must figure your expenses for each Care outside your home. You can count theday. However, if you have to pay for care cost of care provided outside your home if theweekly, monthly, or in another way that includes care is for your dependent under age 13 or anyboth days worked and days not worked, you can Payments to Relatives orother qualifying person who regularly spends atfigure your credit including the expenses you Dependentsleast 8 hours each day in your home.paid for days you did not work. Any day when
Dependent care center. You can count You can count work-related payments you makeyou work at least 1 hour is a day of work.
care provided outside your home by a depen- to relatives who are not your dependents, even if
dent care center only if the center complies with they live in your home. However, do not countExample 1. You work 3 days a week. While
all state and local regulations that apply to theseyou work, your 6-year-old child attends a depen- any amounts you pay to:
dent care center, which complies with all state centers.
1. A dependent for whom you (or yourand local regulations. You can pay the center A dependent care center is a place that pro- spouse if filing jointly) can claim an exemp-$150 for any 3 days a week or $250 for 5 days a vides care for more than six persons (other than tion,week. Your child attends the center 5 days a persons who live there) and receives a fee,
week. Your work-related expenses are limited to payment, or grant for providing services for any 2. Your child who was under age 19 at the
$150 a week. of those persons, even if the center is not run for end of the year, even if he or she is not
profit. your dependent,
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Camp. The cost of sending your child to an 3. A person who was your spouse any timeExample 1 except the center does not offer a overnight camp is not considered a work-related during the year, or3-day option. The entire $250 weekly fee may be expense. The cost of sending your child to a daya work-related expense. 4. The parent of your qualifying person if yourcamp may be a work-related expense, even if qualifying person is your child and underthe camp specializes in a particular activity, age 13.such as computers or soccer.Care of a Qualifying Person
Transportation. If a care provider takes aTo be work-related, your expenses must be to Joint Return Testqualifying person to or from a place where careprovide care for a qualifying person.
is provided, that transportation is for the care ofYou do not have to choose the least expen- Generally, married couples must file a joint re-the qualifying person. This includes transporta-sive way of providing care. The cost of a paid turn to take the credit. However, if you are legallytion by bus, subway, taxi, or private car. How-care provider may be an expense for the care of separated or living apart from your spouse, youever, transportation not provided by a carea qualifying person even if another care provider may be able to file as Head of Household andprovider is not for the care of a qualifying person.is available at no cost. still take the credit. However, you cannot use theAlso, if you pay the transportation cost for theExpenses are for the care of a qualifying filing status Ð Married Filing Separately, if youcare provider to come to your home, that ex-person only if their main purpose is the person's plan to claim the credit.pense is not for care of a qualifying person.well-being and protection. 
Expenses for household services qualify if Legally separated. You are not consideredFees and deposits. Fees you paid to anpart of the services is for the care of qualifying married if you are legally separated from youragency to get the services of a care provider,persons. See Household services, later. spouse under a decree of divorce or separatedeposits you paid to an agency or pre-school, maintenance. You may be eligible to take theExpenses not for care. Expenses for care do application fees, and other indirect expenses credit on your return using Head of Householdnot include amounts you pay for food, lodging, are work-related expenses if you have to pay filing status.clothing, education, and entertainment. How- them to get care, even though they are notever, you can include small amounts paid for directly for care. However, a forfeited deposit isthese items if they are incident to and cannot be Married and living apart. You are not consid-not for the care of a qualifying person if care isseparated from the cost of caring for the qualify- ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifnot provided.ing person. all the following apply.
Example 1. You paid a fee to an agency toEducation. Expenses for a child in nursery 1. You file a return apart from your spouse.get the services of the nanny who cares for yourschool, pre-school, or similar programs for chil- 2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per-2-year-old daughter while you work. The fee youdren below the level of kindergarten are ex- son for more than half the year.paid is a work-related expense.penses for care. Expenses to attend
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses 3. You pay more than half the cost of keepingExample 2. You placed a deposit with afor care. Do not use these expenses to figure up your home for the year.pre-school to reserve a place for your 3-year-oldyour credit. 4. Your spouse does not live in your home forchild. You later sent your child to a differentHowever, expenses for before- or after- the last 6 months of the year.pre-school and forfeited the deposit. The for-school care of a child in kindergarten or a higher
feited deposit is not for care and so is not agrade may be expenses for care. Costs of keeping up a home. The costs ofwork-related expense.Summer school and tutoring programs are keeping up a home normally include propertynot for care. taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges,Household services. Expenses you pay for
home repairs, insurance on the home, and foodhousehold services meet the work-related ex-Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child eaten at home.pense test if they are at least partly for theto a nursery school that provides lunch and
The costs of keeping up a home do notwell-being and protection of a qualifying person.educational activities as a part of its preschool
include payments for clothing, education, medi-Household services are ordinary and usualchildcare service. The lunch and educational
cal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans-services done in and around your home that areactivities are incident to the childcare, and their
portation, or mortgage principal.necessary to run your home. They include thecost cannot be separated from the cost of care.
services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How- They also do not include the purchase, per-You can count the total cost when you figure the
ever, they do not include the services of a chauf- manent improvement, or replacement of prop-credit.
feur, bartender, or gardener. See Household erty. For example, you cannot include the cost of
Services in Publication 503 for more informa- replacing a water heater. However, you can in-Example 2. You place your 10-year-old
tion. clude the cost of repairing a water heater.child in a boarding school so you can work full
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 215

Page 218 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died during do not provide this information to you or if they Medical expenses. Some expenses for the
the year and you do not remarry before the end provide incorrect information. care of qualifying persons who are not able to
of the year, you generally must file a joint return care for themselves may qualify as work-relatedProvider refusal. If the provider refuses toto take the credit. If you do remarry before the expenses and also as medical expenses. Yougive you their identifying information, you shouldend of the year, the credit can be claimed on can use them either way, but you cannot use thereport whatever information you have (such asyour deceased spouse's own return. same expenses to claim both a credit and athe name and address) on the form you use to medical expense deduction.claim the credit. Enter ªSee Attached Statementº If you use these expenses to figure the creditProvider in the columns calling for the information you do and they are more than the earned income limitnot have. Then attach a statement explainingIdentification Test or the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addthat you requested the information from the care
the excess to your medical expenses. However,provider, but the provider did not give you theYou must identify all persons or organizations if you use your total expenses to figure yourinformation. Be sure to write your name andthat provide care for your child or dependent. medical expense deduction, you cannot use anysocial security number on this statement. TheUse Part I of Form 2441 to show the information. part of them to figure your credit.statement will show that you used due diligence
in trying to furnish the necessary information. Amounts excluded from your incomeNote. If you did not have a qualifying person
under your employer's dependent careand any care providers for 2010, and you are U.S. citizens and resident aliens living benefits plan cannot be used to claim afiling Form 2441 only to report taxable income in
CAUTION
! abroad. If you are living abroad, your care medical expense deduction.Part III, enter ªnoneº in line 1, column (a). provider may not have, and may not be required
to get, a U.S. taxpayer identification number (forInformation needed. To identify the care pro-
example, an SSN or EIN). If so, enter ªLAFCPºvider, you must give the provider's: Dependent Care Benefits(Living Abroad Foreign Care Provider) in the
1. Name, space for the care provider's taxpayer identifica- If you receive dependent care benefits, yourtion number.2. Address, and dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be
reduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit , later. But,3. Taxpayer identification number. even if you cannot take the credit, you may be
If the care provider is an individual, the tax- able to take an exclusion or deduction for the
How To Figure payer identification number is his or her social dependent care benefits.
security number or individual taxpayer identifi-
the Creditcation number. If the care provider is an organi- Dependent care benefits. Dependent care
zation, then it is the employer identification benefits include:
Your credit is a percentage of your work-relatednumber (EIN).
1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-expenses. Your expenses are subject to theYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi-
ther you or your care provider for the careearned income limit and the dollar limit. Thefication number if the care provider is a
of your qualifying person while you work,percentage is based on your adjusted grosstax-exempt organization (such as a church or
income.school). In this case, enter ªTax-Exemptº in the 2. The fair market value of care in a daycarespace where the tax form calls for the number. facility provided or sponsored by your em-If you cannot provide all of the information or ployer, andFiguring Total if the information is incorrect you must be able to
3. Pre-tax contributions you made under aWork-Related Expensesshow that you used due diligence (discussed
dependent care flexible spending arrange-later) in trying to furnish the necessary informa-
To figure the credit for 2010 work-related ex- ment.tion.
penses, count only those you paid by December Your salary may have been reduced to pay forGetting the information. You can use Form 31, 2010. these benefits. If you received benefits as anW-10 to request the required information from employee, they should be shown in box 10 ofExpenses prepaid in an earlier year. If youthe care provider. If you do not use Form W-10, your Form W-2. See Statement for employee ,pay for services before they are provided, youyou can get the information from one of the other later. Benefits you received as a partner shouldcan count the prepaid expenses only in the yearsources listed in the instructions for Form W-10
be shown in box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Formthe care is received. Claim the expenses for theincluding:
1065) with code O. Enter the amount of theselater year as if they were actually paid in that
1. A copy of the provider's social security benefits on the first line of Part III of Form 2441.later year.
card,
Expenses not paid until the following year. Exclusion or deduction. If your employer2. A copy of the provider's completed Form Do not count 2009 expenses that you paid in provides dependent care benefits under a quali-W-4 if he or she is your household em- 2010 as work-related expenses for 2010. You fied plan, you may be able to exclude theseployee, may be able to claim an additional credit for benefits from your income. Your employer can
them on your 2010 return, but you must figure it tell you whether your benefit plan qualifies. To3. A copy of the statement furnished by your
separately. See Payments for previous year's claim the exclusion, you must complete Part IIIemployer if the provider is your employer's
expenses under Amount of Credit in Publication of Form 2441. You cannot use Form 1040EZ.dependent care plan, or
503. If you are self-employed and receive benefits4. A letter or invoice from the provider if it from a qualified dependent care benefit plan,If you had expenses in 2010 that youshows the information. you are treated as both employer and employee.did not pay until 2011, you cannot Therefore, you would not get an exclusion fromcount them when figuring your 2010You should keep this information with
TIP wages. Instead, you would get a deduction oncredit. You may be able to claim a credit for themyour tax records. Do not send Form Form 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E,on your 2011 return.W-10 (or other document containing
RECORDS line 18 or 28; or Schedule F, line 17. To claim thethis information) to the Internal Revenue Serv- deduction, you must use Form 2441.Expenses reimbursed. If a state social serv-ice.
The amount you can exclude or deduct isices agency pays you a nontaxable amount to
limited to the smallest of:Due diligence. If the care provider information reimburse you for some of your child and depen-
you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex- 1. The total amount of dependent care bene-may not be allowed. However, if you can show penses that are reimbursed as work-related fits you received during the year,that you used due diligence in trying to supply expenses.
2. The total amount of qualified expenses youthe information, you can still claim the credit.
incurred during the year,You can show due diligence by getting and Example. You paid work-related expenses
keeping the provider's completed Form W-10 or of $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a state 3. Your earned income,one of the other sources of information listed social services agency. You can use only
4. Your spouse's earned income, orearlier. Care providers can be penalized if they $1,000 to figure your credit.
Page 216 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 219 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately). month, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for that earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-
See Earned Income Limit, below. month. age. This percentage depends on your adjusted
gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, orThe definition of earned income for the exclu- Both spouses qualify. If, in the same Form 1040A, line 22. The following table showssion or deduction is the same as the definition month, both you and your spouse are either the percentage to use based on adjusted grossused when figuring the credit except that earned full-time students or not able to care for your- income.income for the exclusion or deduction does not selves, only one spouse can be considered to
IF your adjusted gross THEN theinclude any dependent care benefits you re- have this earned income of $250 (or $500) for
income is: percentageceive. For details or if you or your spouse had that month.
But not is:nontaxable combat pay, see the instructions for
Over overForm 2441. Dollar Limit
$ 0 $15,000 35%Statement for employee. Your employer 15,000 17,000 34%There is a dollar limit on the amount of yourmust give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement) 17,000 19,000 33%work-related expenses you can use to figure theshowing in box 10 the total amount of dependent 19,000 21,000 32%credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifyingcare benefits provided to you during the year 21,000 23,000 31%person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifyingunder a qualified plan. Your employer will also 23,000 25,000 30%persons.include any dependent care benefits over 25,000 27,000 29%
$5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2 27,000 29,000 28%If you paid work-related expenses for
in box 10. 29,000 31,000 27%the care of two or more qualifying per-
31,000 33,000 26%sons, the $6,000 limit does not need to
TIPEffect of exclusion. If you exclude dependent 33,000 35,000 25%be divided equally among them. For example, ifcare benefits from your income, the amount of 35,000 37,000 24%your work-related expenses for the care of onethe excluded benefits: 37,000 39,000 23%qualifying person are $3,200 and your 39,000 41,000 22%work-related expenses for another qualifying1. Is not included in your work-related ex- 41,000 43,000 21%person are $2,800, you can use the total,penses, and 43,000 No limit 20%$6,000, when figuring the credit.2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.
Yearly limit. The dollar limit is a yearly limit.
The amount of the dollar limit remains the sameEarned Income Limit no matter how long, during the year, you have a How To Claim the
qualifying person in your household. Use theThe amount of work-related expenses you use
$3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses Creditto figure your credit cannot be more than:
for the care of one qualifying person at any time
1. Your earned income for the year if you are during the year. Use $6,000 if you paid To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or
single at the end of the year, or work-related expenses for the care of more than Form 1040A. You cannot claim the credit on
one qualifying person at any time during the Form 1040EZ.2. The smaller of your or your spouse's year.earned income for the year if you are mar- Form 1040 or 1040A. You must completeried at the end of the year. Form 2441 and attach it to your Form 1040 or
1040A. Enter the credit on Form 1040, line 48, orEarned income is defined under Earned Income Reduced Dollar Limit
Form 1040A, line 29. An example of a filled-inTest, earlier.
If you received dependent care benefits that you Form 2441 is shown at the end of this chapter.For purposes of item (2), use your exclude or deduct from your income, you mustspouse's earned income for the entire Limit on credit. The amount of credit you cansubtract that amount from the dollar limit thatyear, even if you were married for only claim is generally limited to the amount of your
TIPapplies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig-part of the year. tax. For more information, see the Instructionsured in Part III of Form 2441. See Dependent for Form 2441.Care Benefits, earlier, for information on exclud-Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa- ing or deducting these benefits. Tax credit not refundable. You cannot getrated or married and living apart from your a refund for any part of the credit that is morespouse (as described under Joint Return Test , Example. George is a widower with one than this limit.earlier), you are not considered married for pur- child and earns $24,000 a year. He paysposes of the earned income limit. Use only your Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care ofincome in figuring the earned income limit. ords of your work-related expenses.his 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim the Also, if your dependent or spouse is
RECORDScredit for child and dependent care expenses.Surviving spouse. If your spouse died during not able to care for himself or herself, your rec-His employer pays an additional $1,000 under athe year and you file a joint return as a surviving ords should show both the nature and the lengthdependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-spouse, you are not considered married for pur- of the disability. Other records you should keepcluded from George's income.poses of the earned income limit. Use only your to support your claim for the credit are describedincome in figuring the earned income limit. Although the dollar limit for his work-related earlier under Provider Identification Test.expenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person),Community property laws. You should dis- George figures his credit on only $2,000 of theregard community property laws when you fig- $2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This isure earned income for this credit. because his dollar limit is reduced as shown
next.Student-spouse or spouse not able to care Employment Taxes for
for self. Your spouse who is either a full-time
George's Reduced Dollar Limitstudent or not able to care for himself or herself Household Employers
is treated as having earned income. His or her 1) Maximum allowable expenses
If you pay someone to come to your home andearned income for each month is considered to for one qualifying person .... . $3,000
care for your dependent or spouse, you may bebe at least $250 if there is one qualifying person 2) Minus: Dependent care benefits
a household employer. If you are a householdin your home, or at least $500 if there are two or George excludes from income −1,000
employer, you will need an employer identifica-more. 3) Reduced dollar limit on expenses
tion number (EIN) and you may have to payGeorge can use for the credit . . $2,000Spouse works. If your spouse works during employment taxes. If the individuals who work inthat month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or your home are self-employed, you are not liablehis or her actual earned income for that month. for any of the taxes discussed in this section.Amount of Credit
Spouse qualifies for part of month.  If Self-employed persons who are in business for
your spouse is a full-time student or not able to To determine the amount of your credit, multiply themselves are not household employees. Usu-
care for himself or herself for only part of a your work-related expenses (after applying the ally, you are not a household employer if the
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

Page 220 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person who cares for your dependent or spouse and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc- qualify to be excluded from her income. Her
does so at his or her home or place of business. tions. employer reports the value of this service as
If you use a placement agency that exercises $3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on her
State employment tax. You may also have tocontrol over what work is done and how it will be Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax-
pay state unemployment tax. Contact your statedone by a babysitter or companion who works in able wages in box 1.
unemployment tax office for information. Youyour home, the worker is not your employee. A neighbor cares for Joan's older child (Seth)should also find out whether you need to pay orThis control could include providing rules of con- after school, on holidays, and during the sum-collect other state employment taxes or carryduct and appearance and requiring regular re- mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for thisworkers' compensation insurance. A list of stateports. In this case, you do not have to pay
care.employment tax agencies, including addressesemployment taxes. But, if an agency merely
and phone numbers, is in Publication 926.gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 as
that list, and pay the sitter directly, the sitter may follows.
be your employee.
If you have a household employee, you may 1) Work-related expenses Joan paid $ 2,400
be subject to: 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualifiedExample
individuals) .............. . $ 6,000
1. Social security and Medicare taxes, 3) Minus: Dependent care benefitsThe following example shows how to figure the excluded from Joan's income .. . -3,0002. Federal unemployment tax, and credit for child and dependent care expenses for 4) Reduced dollar limit ........ . $ 3,000two children when employer-provided depen-3. Federal income tax withholding. 5) Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400)dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in or dollar limit ($3,000) ....... . $ 2,400Social security and Medicare taxes are gener- draft Form 2441  is shown at the end of this 6) Percentage for AGI of $29,000ally withheld from the employee's pay and chapter. (28%) .................. . .28matched by the employer. Federal unemploy- 7) Multiply the amount on line 5 byment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer only Illustrated example. Joan Thomas is di- the percentage on line 6 ($2,400and provides for payments of unemployment vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She x .28) .................. . $ 672
compensation to workers who have lost their works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross 8) Enter the tax liability limit from
jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the income (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amount Form 2441, line 10 ......... . $ 963
employee's total pay if the employee asks you to is earned income. 9) Credit (Enter the smaller of line 7
do so and you agree. Joan's younger child (Susan) stays at her or line 8) ................ . $ 672
For more information on a household em- employer's on-site childcare center while she
ployer's tax responsibilities, see Publication 926 works. The benefits from this childcare center
Page 218 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 221 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT AS OF 
November 17, 2010
Form    2441
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
     Child and Dependent Care Expenses
  
a Attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.       
a See separate instructions.
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
2441
`
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 21
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care—You must complete this part.   
(If you have more than two care providers, see the instructions.)
1 (a)  Care provider’s  
name
(b)  Address  
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(c)  Identifying number 
(SSN or EIN)
(d)  Amount paid  
(see instructions)
Did you receive  
dependent care benefits?
No a Complete only Part II below.
Yes a Complete Part III on the back next.
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. If you do, you cannot file Form 1040A. For details, 
see the instructions for Form 1040, line 59, or Form 1040NR, line 58.
Part II Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2 Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a)  Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b)  Qualifying person’s social 
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you 
 incurred and paid in 2010 for the 
person listed in column (a)  
3 Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying 
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount 
from line 31 .......................... 3 
4 Enter your earned income. See instructions ............... 4 
5 If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student 
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4 .... 5 
6 Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5 .................. 6 
7 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38; Form 
1040A,  line 22; or Form 1040NR, line 37..... 7 
8 Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
If line 7 is:
Over
But not  
over
Decimal  
amount is
$0—15,000 .35
15,000—17,000 .34
17,000—19,000 .33
19,000—21,000 .32
21,000—23,000 .31
23,000—25,000 .30
25,000—27,000 .29
27,000—29,000 .28
If line 7 is:
Over
But not  
over
Decimal  
amount is
$29,000—31,000 .27
31,000—33,000 .26
33,000—35,000 .25
35,000—37,000 .24
37,000—39,000 .23
39,000—41,000 .22
41,000—43,000 .21
43,000—No limit .20
8 X .
9 Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2009 expenses in 2010, see 
the instructions ......................... 9 
10 Tax liability limit. Enter the amount from the Credit 
Limit Worksheet in the instructions....... 10 
11 Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 
here and on Form 1040, line 48; Form 1040A, line 29; or Form 1040NR, line 46 .... 11 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11862M Form 2441 (2010)
Joan Thomas 559-00-3436
Pat Green
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240 240-00-3811 2,400
ACME Computers
(See W-2)
Seth Thomas 559-00-1234 2,400
Susan Thomas 559-00-5678
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
29,000
28
672
963
672
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

Page 222 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Draft as of
November 17, 2010
Form 2441 (2010) Page 2
Part III   Dependent Care Benefits
12 Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received in 2010. Amounts you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form(s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a 
partner, include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from
your sole proprietorship or partnership .................. 12 
13 Enter the amount, if any, you carried over from 2009 and used in 2010 during the grace 
period. See instructions ....................... 13 
14 Enter the amount, if any, you forfeited or carried forward to 2011. See instructions . . . 14 ( )
15 Combine lines 12 through 14. See instructions ............... 15 
16 Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred 
in 2010 for the care of the qualifying person(s) ...  16 
17 Enter the smaller of line 15 or 16 ........ 17 
18 Enter your earned income. See instructions ....  18 
19 Enter    the    amount    shown    below    that    applies  
to you.    
• If   married   filing   jointly,   enter   your 
spouse’s  earned  income  (if  your 
spouse was a student or was disabled, 
see the instructions for line 5).
• If   married   filing  separately, see  
instructions.
• All others, enter the amount from line 18.
}
 ... 19 
20 Enter the smallest of line 17, 18, or 19 ...... 20 
21 Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and 
you were required to enter your spouse’s earned 
income on line 19)............. 21 
22 Is any amount on line 12 from your sole proprietorship or partnership? (Form 1040A filers 
go to line 25.)
No. Enter -0-.
Yes. Enter the amount here ................... . 22 
23 Subtract line 22 from line 15 ......... 23 
24 Deductible benefits. Enter the smallest of line 20, 21, or 22. Also, include this amount on
the appropriate line(s) of your return. See instructions ............ . 24 
25 Excluded benefits. Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: If you checked "No" on line 22, enter 
the smaller of line 20 or 21. Otherwise, subtract line 24 from the smaller of line 20 or line
21. If zero or less, enter -0-. Form 1040A filers: Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 21 . . 25 
26 Taxable benefits. Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: Subtract line 25 from line 23. If zero or 
less, enter -0-. Also, include this amount on Form 1040, line 7; or Form 1040NR, line 8. On
the dotted line next to Form 1040, line 7; or Form 1040NR, line 8, enter “DCB.”
Form 1040A filers: Subtract line 25 from line 15. Also, include this amount on Form 1040A, 
line 7. In the space to the left of line 7, enter “DCB” ............. . 26 
To claim the child and dependent care  
credit, complete lines 27 through 31 below.
27 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons) ........... . 27 
28 Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: Add lines 24 and 25. Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount 
from line 25 .......................... . 28 
29 Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit. 
Exception. If you paid 2009 expenses in 2010, see the instructions for line 9 .... .  29 
30 Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown 
on line 28 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here.... . 30 
31 Enter the smaller of line 29 or 30. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this form
and complete lines 4 through 11 ................... . 31 
Form 2441 (2010)
3,000
3,000
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
3,000
-0-
6,000
3,000
3,000
2,400
2,400
Page 220 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 223 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
permanent and total disability (discussed next)Qualified Individual and have taxable disability income (discussed
later under Disability income). You are retired onYou are a qualified individual for this credit if you33. permanent and total disability if:are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, and either of
the following applies. • You were permanently and totally disabled
when you retired, and1. You were age 65 or older at the end ofCredit for the • You retired on disability before the close of2010.
the tax year.2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2010Elderly or the and all three of the following statements Even if you do not retire formally, you may beare true. considered retired on disability when you haveDisabled stopped working because of your disability.a. You retired on permanent and total dis- If you retired on disability before 1977, andability (explained later). were not permanently and totally disabled at the
b. You received taxable disability income time, you can qualify for the credit if you wereIntroduction for 2010. permanently and totally disabled on January 1,
If you qualify, you may be able to reduce the tax 1976, or January 1, 1977.c. On January 1, 2010, you had notyou owe by taking the credit for the elderly or the reached mandatory retirement age (de- Permanent and total disability. You are per-disabled which is figured on Schedule R (Form fined later under Disability income). manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-1040A or Form 1040).
gage in any substantial gainful activity becauseThis chapter explains the following.
of your physical or mental condition. A physicianAge 65. You are considered to be age 65 on• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly must certify that the condition has lasted or canthe day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, ifor the disabled. be expected to last continuously for 12 monthsyou were born on January 1, 1946, you are
or more, or that the condition can be expected to• How to figure the credit. considered to be age 65 at the end of 2010.
result in death. See Physician's statement, later.
 You may be able to take the credit for the Substantial gainful activity. Substantial
elderly or the disabled if: U.S. Citizen or Resident Alien gainful activity is the performance of significant
duties over a reasonable period of time while• You are age 65 or older, or You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or working for pay or profit, or in work generallybe treated as a resident alien) to take the credit.• You retired on permanent and total disabil- done for pay or profit. Full-time work (orGenerally, you cannot take the credit if you wereity and have taxable disability income. part-time work done at your employer's conve-a nonresident alien at any time during the tax nience) in a competitive work situation for atyear. least the minimum wage conclusively showsUseful Items that you are able to engage in substantial gainfulExceptions. You may be able to take theYou may want to see: activity.credit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
Substantial gainful activity is not work you doried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the endPublication to take care of yourself or your home. It is notof the tax year and you and your spouse choose
unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy orto treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If you make❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-that choice, both you and your spouse are taxedDisabled
grams, and similar activities. However, doingon your worldwide incomes.❏ 554 Tax Guide for Seniors this kind of work may show that you are able toIf you were a nonresident alien at the begin-
engage in substantial gainful activity.ning of the year and a resident alien at the end of❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
The fact that you have not worked for somethe year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen
time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youor resident alien at the end of the year, you mayForm (and Instruction)
cannot engage in substantial gainful activity.be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. resi-
❏ Schedule R (Form 1040A or 1040) dent alien for the entire year. In that case, you Sheltered employment. Certain work of-Credit for the Elderly or the may be allowed to take the credit. fered at qualified locations to physically or men-Disabled  For information on these choices, see chap- tally impaired persons is considered shelteredter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for employment. These qualified locations are inAliens. sheltered workshops, hospitals, and similar in-
stitutions, homebound programs, and Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsoredAre You Eligible Married Persons homes.
Compared to commercial employment, payfor the Credit? Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,year, you and your spouse must file a joint return one usually does not look for sheltered employ-You can take the credit for the elderly or the to take the credit. However, if you and your ment if he or she can get other employment. Thedisabled if you meet both of the following re- spouse did not live in the same household at any fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-quirements. time during the tax year, you can file either joint ment is not proof of that person's ability to en-or separate returns and still take the credit.• You are a qualified individual. gage in substantial gainful activity.
Head of household. You can file as head of• Your income is not more than certain lim- Physician's statement. If you are under agehousehold and qualify to take the credit, even ifits. 65, you must have your physician complete ayour spouse lived with you during the first 6 statement certifying that you were permanentlyYou can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B as months of the year, if you meet all the tests. See and totally disabled on the date you retired. Youguides to see if you are eligible for the credit. Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests you can use the statement in the instructions formust meet.Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a quali- Schedule R.
fied individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to
make sure your income is not too high to take Under Age 65the credit.
If you are under age 65 at the end of 2010, youYou can take the credit only if you file
can qualify for the credit only if you are retired onForm 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 221

Page 224 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Were you married at the end of the tax
year?
No
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be able
to take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled
unless your income
exceeds the limits in
Figure 33-B.
/H17074
Yes/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
Yes
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “Yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return $12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
Did you live with your
spouse at any time
during the year?
/H17076
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien? 1
No
/H17074Yes
Are you filing a joint
return with your spouse?
Yes /H17075
Were you 65 or older at the end of
the tax year?
/H17074
No
Are you retired on permanent and
total disability?
No
/H17074
No
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
/H17074
No
Page 222 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 225 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you choose to have the IRS figure theTable 33-1. Initial Amounts credit for you, read the following discussion for
the form you will file (Form 1040 or 1040A).
THEN enter on line 10  If you want the IRS to figure your tax, see
IF your filing status is ... of Schedule R... chapter 30.
single, head of household, or qualifying Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure yourwidow(er) with dependent child and, by the end credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries  under Taxof 2010, you were Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
• 65 or older .............................. . $5,000
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000 Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure your
credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Tax
married filing a joint return and by the end of Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
2010
• both of you were 65 or older ................. . $7,500
• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on $5,000permanent and total disability1 ................. . Figuring the Credit
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on $7,500 Yourselfpermanent and total disability2 ................. .
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $7,500 If you figure the credit yourself, fill out the front of65 and retired on permanent and total disability3 .... . Schedule R. Next, fill out Part III of Schedule R.• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under If you file Form 1040A, enter the amount from$5,00065 and not retired on permanent and total disability .. . Schedule R, line 22, on line 30. If you file Form
1040, include the amount from Schedule R, linemarried filing a separate return and you did not 22, on line 53, check box c, and enter ªSch Rº onlive with your spouse at any time during the year the line next to that box.and, by the end of 2010, you were
There are five steps in Part III to deter-• 65 or older .............................. . $3,750 mine the amount of your credit:• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
1. Determine your initial amount (lines3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.
10±12).
2. Determine the total of any nontaxable so-You do not have to file this statement with Payments that are not disability income.
cial security and certain other nontaxableAny payment you receive from a plan that doesyour Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must
pensions and disability benefits you re-not provide for disability retirement is not disabil-keep it for your records.
ceived (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).ity income. Any lump-sum payment for accruedVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af- annual leave that you receive when you retire on 3. Determine your excess adjusted gross in-fairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and disability is a salary payment and is not disability come (lines 14±17).totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form income. 
21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total 4. Determine the total of Steps 2 and 3 (lineFor purposes of the credit for the elderly orDisability, for the physician's statement you are 18).the disabled, disability income does not includerequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be amounts you receive after you reach mandatory 5. Determine your credit (lines 19±22).signed by a person authorized by the VA to do retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is the These steps are discussed in more detail next.so. You can get this form from your local VA age set by your employer at which you would
regional office. have had to retire, had you not become dis-
abled.Physician's statement obtained in earlier
year. If you got a physician's statement in an
earlier year and, due to your continued disabled Step 1. Determine Income Limits
condition, you were unable to engage in any Initial AmountTo determine if you can claim the credit, yousubstantial gainful activity during 2010, you may
must consider two income limits. The first limit isnot need to get another physician's statement To figure the credit, you must first determinethe amount of your adjusted gross incomefor 2010. For a detailed explanation of the condi- your initial amount using lines 10 through 12.(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-tions you must meet, see the instructions for See Table 33-1. Your initial amount is on line 12.able social security and other nontaxable pen-Part II of Schedule R. If you meet the required
sions you received. The limits are shown inconditions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Initial amounts for persons under age 65. IfFigure 33-B.Schedule R. you are a qualified individual under age 65, your
If both your AGI and nontaxable pensions initial amount cannot be more than your taxableIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of are less than the income limits, you may be able disability income.Schedule R, enter in the space above the box on to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit Your-line 2 in Part II the first name(s) of the spouse(s) self, later.for whom the box is checked. Step 2. Total Certain
If either your AGI or your nontaxable Nontaxable Pensions pensions are equal to or more than theDisability income. If you are under age 65, income limits, you cannot take the and Benefits
CAUTION
!you must also have taxable disability income to credit.qualify for the credit. Disability income must Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxable
meet both of the following requirements. social security and certain other nontaxable pay-
ments you received during the year. You must• It must be paid under your employer's ac- reduce your initial amount by these payments.cident or health plan or pension plan. Enter these nontaxable payments on linesCredit Figured for You
• It must be included in your income as 13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you are
wages (or payments instead of wages) for You can figure the credit yourself, or the Internal married filing a joint return, you must enter the
the time you are absent from work be- Revenue Service (IRS) will figure it for you. See combined amount of nontaxable payments both
cause of permanent and total disability. Figuring the Credit Yourself next. you and your spouse receive.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 223

Page 226 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheets are provided in the in- 1. Subtract from your adjusted gross income You cannot take the credit because your
structions for Forms 1040 and 1040A nontaxable social security (line 2) plus your ex-(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, line
to help you determine if any of your cess adjusted gross income (line 3) is more than22) the amount shown for your filing status
TIP
social security benefits (or equivalent railroad your initial amount (line 1).in the following list.
retirement benefits) are taxable. Limit on credit. The amount of credit you cana. $7,500 if you are single, a head of claim is generally limited to the amount of yourNontaxable payments. Include the following household, or a qualifying widow(er), tax. For more information, see the instructionsnontaxable payments in the amounts you enter
for Part III, Schedule R.b. $10,000 if you are married filing a jointon lines 13a and 13b.
return, or• Nontaxable social security payments. This
c. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa-is the nontaxable part of the benefits Examplerate return and you and your spouse didshown in box 5 of Form SSA-1099, Social
Security Benefit Statement, which includes not live in the same household at any The following example illustrates the credit for
disability benefits, before deducting any the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount istime during the tax year.
amounts withheld to pay premiums on taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.
supplementary Medicare insurance, and 2. Divide the result of (1) by 2.
before any reduction because of benefits James Davis is 58 years old. In 2004 he re-
received under workers' compensation. tired on permanent and total disability, and he is
(Do not include a lump-sum death benefit Step 4. Determine the Total still permanently and totally disabled. He got the
payment you may receive as a surviving required physician's statement in 2004, and keptof Steps 2 and 3spouse, or a surviving child's insurance it with his tax records. His physician signed on
benefit payments you may receive as a line B of the statement. This year James checksTo determine if you can take the credit, you mustguardian.) the box in Part II of Schedule R. He does notadd (on line 18) the amounts you figured in Step need to get another statement for 2010.• Nontaxable railroad retirement pension 2 and Step 3. He received the following income for thepayments treated as social security. This year:is the nontaxable part of the benefits IF the total of Steps
2 and 3 is ... THEN ...shown in box 5 of Form RRB-1099, Pay- Nontaxable social security ....... . $1,500
Interest (taxable) ............. . 100ments by the Railroad Retirement Board. equal to or more you cannot take the Taxable disability pension ....... . 11,400than the amount in credit.• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments
Step 1or disability benefits that are paid under a James' adjusted gross income is $11,500law administered by the Department of ($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onless than the you can take theVeterans Affairs (VA). (Do not include Schedule R as follows:amount in Step 1 credit.amounts received as a pension, annuity,
1) Initial amount ............. . $5,000or similar allowance for personal injuries
2) Taxable disability pension .... . 11,400or sickness resulting from active service in 3) Smaller of (1) or (2) ......... . 5,000the armed forces of any country or in the Step 5. Determine Your 4) Nontaxable social securityNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin- benefits ............ . $1,500Creditistration, or the Public Health Service, or 5) Excess adjusted grossas a disability annuity under section 808 of incomeIf you can take the credit, subtract the amountthe Foreign Service Act of 1980.) ($11,500 ± $7,500) ÷  2 . . 2,000determined in Step 4 (line 18) from the amount 6) Add lines 4 and 5 ..... . 3,500• Pension or annuity payments or disability determined in Step 1 (line 12) and multiply the 7) Subtract line 6 from line 3benefits that are excluded from income result by 15%. (Do not enter less than -0-) .... . 1,500under any provision of federal law other 8) Multiply line 7 by 15% (.15) .... . 225In certain cases, the amount of your creditthan the Internal Revenue Code. (Do not 9) Enter the amount from themay be limited. See Limit on credit, later.include amounts that are a return of your Credit Limit Worksheet incost of a pension or annuity. These the Schedule R instructions 216Example. You are 66 years old and youramounts do not reduce your initial 10) Creditspouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. Youamount.) (Enter the smaller of line 8file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjusted or line 9) ........... . $216
gross income is $14,630. Together you receivedYou should be sure to take into ac- He enters $216 on line 30 of Form 1040A.$3,200 from social security, which was nontax-count all of the nontaxable amounts The Schedule R for James Davis is not shown.able. You figure the credit as follows:you receive. These amounts are veri-
CAUTION
!
fied by the IRS through information supplied by Applying the 5 Step Process Amountother government agencies. 1)Initial amount ............ . $5,000
2)Total of social security
andStep 3. Determine Excess other nontaxable
Adjusted Gross Income pensions $3,200
3)Excess adjusted gross
You also must reduce your initial amount by your income
excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- ($14,630 − $10,000) ÷  2 2,315
cess adjusted gross income on lines 14±17. 4)Add line 2 and line 3 .. . 5,515
You figure your excess adjusted gross in- 5)Subtract line 4 from line 1
(Do not enter less than -0-) ... . -0-come as follows:
Page 224 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 227 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or a • Any amount excluded from income be-
resident of the United States. If the child cause of the exclusion of income from 
was adopted, see Adopted child below. Puerto Rico. On the dotted line next to34. Form 1040, line 38, enter the amount ex-For each qualifying child you must check the
cluded and identify it as ªEPRI.º Also at-box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, line 6c,
tach a copy of any Form(s) 499R-2/column (4).
W-2PR to your return.Child Tax Credit
Example. Your son turned 17 on December • Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Form30, 2010. He is a citizen of the United States and 2555, Foreign Earned Income.you claimed him as a dependent on your return.
He is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit • Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,Introduction
because he was not under age 17 at the end of Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.The child tax credit is a credit that may reduce 2010.your tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-
qualifying children. clusion of Income for Bona Fide ResidentsExceptions to time lived with you. A child is
The additional child tax credit is a credit you of American Samoa.considered to have lived with you for all of 2010
may be able to take if you are not able to claim if the child was born or died in 2010 and your
the full amount of the child tax credit. If you do not have any of the above, yourhome was this child's home for the entire time he
or she was alive. Temporary absences for spe-This chapter explains the following. modified AGI is the same as your AGI.
cial circumstances, such as for school, vacation,• Who is a qualifying child. AGI. Your AGI is the amount on Form 1040,medical care, military service, or detention in a line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22.• How much is the credit. juvenile facility, count as time the child lived with
you.• How to claim the credit. There are also exceptions for kidnapped chil-
• Why you should check your tax withhold- dren and children of divorced or separated par-
ing. ents. For details, see Residency Test in chapter Claiming the Credit3.
To claim the child tax credit, you must file FormThe child tax credit and the additional Qualifying child of more than one person. A 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the childchild tax credit should not be confused special rule applies if your qualifying child is thewith the child and dependent care tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must provide
CAUTION
!qualifying child of more than one person. Forcredit discussed in chapter 32. the name and identification number (usually adetails, see Special Rule for Qualifying Child of
social security number) on your tax return forMore Than One Person in chapter 3.
If you have no tax. Credits, such as the child each qualifying child.
tax credit or the credit for child and dependent Adopted child. An adopted child is always If you are filing Form 1040, answer the Ques-care expenses, are used to reduce tax. If your treated as your own child. An adopted child tions in your form instructions for line 51, Formtax on Form 1040, line 46, or Form 1040A, line includes a child lawfully placed with you for legal 1040, to find out which child tax credit worksheet28, is zero, do not figure the child tax credit adoption. you can use to figure the credit.because there is no tax to reduce. However, you If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and
may qualify for the additional child tax credit on If you answer ªYesº to question 1 or 2 in youryour adopted child lived with you all year as a
line 65 (Form 1040) or line 42 (Form 1040A). member of your household in 2010, that child Form 1040 instructions, you must complete the
meets condition (6) above to be a qualifying child tax credit worksheet in Publication 972.
child for the child tax credit. Otherwise, you can use the Child Tax CreditUseful Items
Worksheet in your Form 1040 or Form 1040AYou may want to see:
instructions. (See Example, later.)
Publication
Amount of Credit❏ 972 Child Tax Credit
The maximum amount you can claim for theForm (and Instructions) Additional Child Taxcredit is $1,000 for each qualifying child.
❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit
Credit❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance Limits on the Credit
Certificate This credit is for certain individuals who get lessYou must reduce your child tax credit if either (1) than the full amount of the child tax credit. Theor (2) applies. additional child tax credit may give you a refund
even if you do not owe any tax.1. The amount on line 46, Form 1040, or line
28, Form 1040A, is less than the credit. IfQualifying Child this amount is zero, you cannot take this How to claim the additional child tax credit.credit because there is no tax to reduce.A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax To claim the additional child tax credit, follow theBut you may be able to take the additionalcredit is a child who: steps below.child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax
Credit, later.1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- 2. Your modified adjusted gross income of your child tax credit. See Claiming theter, or a descendant of any of them (for (AGI) is above the amount shown below Credit, earlier.example, your grandchild, niece, or for your filing status.nephew), 2. If you answered ªYesº on line 9 or line 10
a. Married filing jointly - $110,000. of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2010,
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, orb. Single, head of household, or qualifying3. Did not provide over half of his or her own line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheetwidow(er) - $75,000.support for 2010, in Publication 972, use Form 8812 to see if
c. Married filing separately - $55,000.4. Lived with you for more than half of 2010 you can take the additional child tax credit.
(see Exceptions to time lived with you be-
3. If you have an additional child tax credit onlow), Modified AGI. For purposes of the child tax line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to Form5. Is claimed as a dependent on your return, credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus the 1040, line 65, or Form 1040A, line 42.and following amounts that may apply to you.
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 225

Page 228 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and has
two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
child tax credit. Amy's only income is her salary
of $30,450. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on
line 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,450. This is her
taxable earned income.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or
4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,450.
Amy's tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
1040, is $1,108. She claims a $225 credit for
child and dependent care expenses on line 48.
She claims a $400 making work pay credit on
line 63 and a $2,082 earned income credit on
line 64a. She has no other credits.
After answering the Questions in the Form
1040 instructions for line 51, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
credit of $883. Amy's completed questions and
child tax credit worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the additional
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit
and Amy's completed Form 8812, later.
DRAFT
AS OF
NOVEMBER 22, 2010
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
Keep this graphic. Ask for text changes. From SGML conversion.
/H12011
2. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
1. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
No. Use the
worksheet on
pages 41 and 42 to
figure your credit.
Yes. 
You must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. You will
also need the form(s) listed
above for any credit(s) you
are claiming.
/H12011
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396.
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit, 
Form 8859.
STOP
● Residential energy efficient property credit, Form 5695,
Part II.
Page 226 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 229 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT
AS O
F
NOVEMBER 22, 2010
2
2,000
30,450
2,000
75,000
-0-
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 51
Yes. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be your dependent, under age 17 at the end
of 2010, and meet all the conditions in Steps 1 through 3 on page 15.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1 or 2 on page 40. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1/H11003Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
Is the amount on line 2 more than the amount on line 3?
If the result is not a multiple of $1,000,
increase it to the next multiple of $1,000.
For example, increase $425 to $1,000,
increase $1,025 to $2,000, etc.
No. Leave line 4 blank. Enter -0- on line 5.
Multiply the amount on line 4 by 5% (.05). Enter the result.
4
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38.
3. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
3
Keep for Y our Records
CAUTION
● Married filing jointly — $110,000
● Single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) — $75,000
● Married filing separately — $55,000
/H20854
No. STOP
6. Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 5?
You cannot take the child tax credit on Form 1040,
line 51. You also cannot take the additional child
tax credit on Form 1040, line 65. Complete the rest
of your Form 1040.
Go to Part 2 on the next page.
Yes. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the result.
5
Part 1
6
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 227

Page 230 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DRAFT
AS O
F
NOVEMBER 22, 2010
Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Continued from page 41
1040
Yes. STOP
9.
10.
Are the amounts on lines 7 and 8 the same?
TIP 
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .
No. Subtract line 8 from line 7.
Is the amount on line 6 more than the amount on line 9?
TIP 
Yes. Enter the amount from line 9.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.
No. Enter the amount from line 6.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 51.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 65, if you answered “Yes” on line 9 or
line 10 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through lines 64a and 64b.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
9
/H20854
10
/H17076
7. 7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
8. Add the following amounts from:
8
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
Form 1040, line 47
+Form 1040, line 48
Enter the total.
Part 2
+Form 8910, line 21
+Schedule R, line 22
Before you begin Part 2: Figure the amount of any credits you are claiming on Form 5695, Part I; Form 8834, Part I; Form 8910;
Form 8936; or Schedule R.
/H12011
1,108
883
225
883
225
/H12011
/H12011
+Form 1040, line 49
+Form 1040, line 50
+Form 5695, line 11
+Form 8834, line 22
+Form 8936, line 14
Page 228 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 231 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form     8812 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Additional Child Tax Credit
Complete and attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR. 
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
8812
/H17076
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR 
OMB No. 1545-0074
Attachment   
Sequence No. 47 
2010
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number 
Part I All Filers 
1 1040 filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040, line 51).
1040A filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040A, line 33).
1040NR filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 48).
If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of the worksheet on page 4 of the publication.
}
1
2 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 51, Form 1040A, line 33, or Form 1040NR, line 48 ...... 2 
3 Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit ............. 3 
4a Earned income (see instructions on back) ............ 4a 
b Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on 
back) ............. 4b 
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $3,000? 
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6. 
Yes. Subtract $3,000 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result . . . 5
6 Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result .............. 6 
Next.  Do you have three or more qualifying children? 
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the smaller of 
line 3 or line 6 on line 13. 
Yes. If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on line 13. 
Otherwise, go to line 7. 
Part II Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children 
7 Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and  6. 
If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you 
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back .......... 7 
8 1040 filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 
27 and 57, plus any taxes that you identified using code 
“UT” and entered on the dotted line next to line 60. 
1040A filers: Enter -0-. 
1040NR filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040NR, lines 
27 and 55, plus any taxes that you identified using code 
"UT"  and entered on the dotted line next to line 59. 
}
8 
9 Add lines 7 and 8 ................... 9 
10 1040 filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 
64a and 69. 
1040A filers: Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line 
41a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA 
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 44 
(see instructions on back). 
1040NR filers: Enter the amount from Form 1040NR, line 64. 
}
10 
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ................. 11 
12 Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11 ...................... 12 
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13. 
Part III Additional Child Tax Credit 
13 This is your additional child tax credit ................... 13 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040A 
1040 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR /H17076
Enter this amount on 
Form 1040, line 65, 
Form 1040A, line 42, or 
Form 1040NR, line 62.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 10644E Form 8812 (2010)
Amy Brown 012-00-5678
2,000
883
1,117
30,450
✔ 27,450
4,118
✔
1,117
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 229

Page 232 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are eligible to claim the American op- for academic periods beginning in 2010 and in
portunity credit and you are also eligible to claim the first 3 months of 2011.
the lifetime learning credit for the same student For example, if you paid $1,500 in December
35. in the same year, you can choose to claim either 2010 for qualified tuition for the spring 2011
credit, but not both. semester beginning in January 2011, you may
If you pay qualified education expenses for be able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2010
more than one student in the same year, you education credit(s).
Education can choose to take the American opportunity You cannot use any amount paid inand the lifetime learning credits on a 2009 or 2011 to figure your 2010 edu-per-student, per-year basis. This means that, for cation credit(s).Credits
CAUTION
! example, you can claim the American opportu-
nity credit for one student and the lifetime learn- Academic period. An academic period in-ing credit for another student in the same year. cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other
What's New Differences between the American opportu- period of study (such as a summer school ses-
nity and lifetime learning credits. There are sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-
several differences between these two credits. tional institution. In the case of an educationalHope credit not available for 2010. This
These differences are summarized in Table institution that uses credit hours or clock hourscredit is not available because the special rules
35-1, later. and does not have academic terms, each pay-for students attending school in a Midwestern
ment period can be treated as an academicdisaster area have expired.
period.Useful Items
You may want to see: Eligible educational institution. An eligible
educational institution is any college, university,Publication vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-Introduction
cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-❏ 970 Tax Benefits for EducationFor 2010, there are two tax credits available to dent aid program administered by the U.S.
persons who pay expenses for higher (postsec- Department of Education. It includes virtually allForm (and Instructions)ondary) education. They are: accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-❏ 8863 Education Credits (American vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-• The American opportunity credit, and Opportunity and Lifetime Learning stitutions. The educational institution should beCredits)• The lifetime learning credit. able to tell you if it is an eligible educational
institution.The chapter will present an overview of these
Certain educational institutions locatededucation credits. To get the detailed informa-
outside the United States also participate in thetion you will need to claim either of the credits,
U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu-and for examples illustrating that information, Who Can Claim an dent Aid (FSA) programs.see chapters 2 and 3 of Publication 970.
Who can claim a dependent's expenses. IfEducation Credit
Can you claim more than one education a student is claimed as a dependent on another
credit this year? For each student, you can You may be able to claim an education credit if person's tax return, only the person who claims
choose for any year only one of the credits. For you, your spouse, or a dependent you claim on the student as a dependent can claim a credit for
example, if you choose to take the American your tax return was a student enrolled at or the student's qualified education expenses. If a
opportunity credit for a child on your 2010 tax attending an eligible educational institution. The student is not claimed as a dependent on an-
return, you cannot, for that same child, also credits are based on the amount of qualified other person's tax return, only the student can
claim the lifetime learning credit for 2010. education expenses paid for the student in 2010 claim a credit.
Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits
Caution. You can claim both the American opportunity credit and the lifetime learning credit on the same return Ðbut not for the same student.
American Opportunity Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
Maximum credit Up to $2,500 credit per eligible student Up to $2,000 credit per return
Limit on modified adjusted $180,000 if married filling jointly; $120,000 if married filling jointly; 
gross income (MAGI) $90,000 if single, head of household, or qualifying $60,000 if single, head of household, or qualifying
widow(er) widow(er)
Refundable or 40% of credit may be refundable Credit limited to the amount of tax you must pay on your
nonrefundable taxable income
Number of years of Available ONLY for the first 4 years of postsecondary Available for all years of postsecondary education and for
postsecondary education education courses to acquire or improve job skills
Number of tax years credit Available ONLY for 4 tax years per eligible student Available for an unlimited number of years
available
Type of degree required Student must be pursuing an undergraduate degree or Student does not need to be pursuing a degree or other
other recognized education credential recognized education credential
Number of courses Student must be enrolled at least half time for at least Available for one or more courses
one academic period beginning during the tax year
Felony drug conviction No felony drug convictions on student's records Felony drug convictions are permitted
Qualified expenses Tuition and required enrollment fees. Course-related Tuition and required enrollment fees, including amounts
books, supplies, and equipment do not need to be required to be paid to the institution for course-related
purchased from the institution in order to qualify. books, supplies, and equipment.
Payments for academic Payments made in 2010 for academic periods beginning in 2010 and in the first 3 months of 2011
periods
Page 230 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 233 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, qualified education expenses books, supplies, and equipment required Adjustments to Qualifiedpaid on behalf of the student by someone other to be paid to the institution as a condition
Education Expensesthan the student (such as a relative) are treated of enrollment or attendance.
as paid by the student. However, qualified edu-
If you pay qualified education expenses withcation expenses paid (or treated as paid) by a Qualified education expenses do not include certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim an edu-student who is claimed as a dependent on your amounts paid for: cation credit for those amounts. You must re-tax return are treated as paid by you. Therefore,
• Room and board, insurance, medical ex- duce the qualified education expenses by theyou are treated as having paid expenses that
penses (including student health fees), amount of any tax-free educational assistancewere paid from your dependent student's earn-
and refund(s) you received.transportation, or other similar personal,ings, gifts, inheritances, savings, etc.
living, or family expenses. Tax-free educational assistance. This in-Who cannot claim a credit. You cannot take cludes:• Any course or other education involvingan education credit if any of the following apply. sports, games, or hobbies, or any non- • Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow-
credit course, unless such course or other1. You are claimed as a dependent on an- ships (see chapter 12 of this publication
education is part of the student's degreeother person's tax return, such as your and chapter 1 of Publication 970),
parent's return. program or (for the lifetime learning credit • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationonly) helps the student acquire or improve2. Your filing status is married filing sepa- 970),job skills.rately. • Employer-provided educational assistance• Nonacademic fees, such as student activ-3. You (or your spouse) were a nonresident (see chapter 11 of Publication 970),ity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses,alien for any part of 2010 and did not elect • Veterans' educational assistance (seeor other expenses unrelated to the aca-to be treated as a resident alien for tax chapter 1 of Publication 970), anddemic course of instruction.purposes.
• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments4. Your MAGI is one of the following. (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedPaid with borrowed funds. You can claim an as educational assistance.a. American opportunity credit: $180,000 education credit for qualified education ex-or more if married filing jointly, or penses paid with the proceeds of a loan. Use the$90,000 or more if single, head of Refunds. Qualified education expenses doexpenses to figure the credit for the year inhousehold, or qualifying widow(er). not include expenses for which you, or someonewhich the expenses are paid, not the year in
else who paid qualified education expenses onb. Lifetime learning credit: $120,000 or which the loan is repaid. Treat loan payments
behalf of a student, receive a refund. For moremore if married filing jointly, or $60,000 sent directly to the educational institution as paid
information, see Refunds in chapters 2 and 3 ofor more if single, head of household, or on the date the institution credits the student's Publication 970.qualifying widow(er). account.
Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-Figure 35-A, at the end of this chapter, may tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu-Student withdraws from class(es). You canbe helpful in determining if you can claim an cation expenses by amounts paid with funds theclaim an education credit for qualified educationeducation credit on your tax return. student receives as:expenses not refunded when a student with-There are a number of factors, such as • Payment for services, such as wages,draws.your filing status, your MAGI, and
• A loan,whether you are subject to the alterna-
TIP
tive minimum tax, that will affect the amount of No Double Benefit Allowed • A gift,any education credit you are eligible to claim.
• An inheritance, or You cannot do any of the following.When you figure your taxes, you may want to
compare the different education credits in order • A withdrawal from the student's personal• Deduct higher education expenses onto choose the method(s) that gives you the low- savings.your income tax return (as, for example, aest tax liability. If you qualify, you may find that a business expense) and also claim an edu-combination of credit(s) and other education Do not reduce the qualified education ex-cation credit based on those same ex-benefit(s) gives you the lowest tax. See Publica- penses by any scholarship or fellowship re-penses.tion 970 for information on other benefits. ported as income on the student's tax return in
• Claim more than 1 education credit based the following situations.
on the same qualified education ex- • The use of the money is restricted to costspenses. of attendance (such as room and board)
Qualified Education • Claim an education credit based on the other than qualified education expenses.
same expenses used to figure the tax-free • The use of the money is not restricted andExpenses portion of a distribution from a Coverdell is used to pay education expenses thateducation savings account (ESA) or quali- are not qualified (such as room andGenerally, qualified education expenses are fied tuition program (QTP). board).amounts paid in 2010 for tuition and fees re-
• Claim an education credit based on quali-quired for the student's enrollment or attend- For examples, see chapter 2 in Publicationfied education expenses paid with educa-ance at an eligible educational institution. It does 970.not matter whether the expenses were paid in tional assistance, such as a tax-free
cash, by check, by credit or debit card, or with scholarship, grant, or employer-provided
borrowed funds. educational assistance. See Adjustments
 Only certain expenses for course-related to Qualified Education Expenses, next.
books, supplies, and equipment qualify. When Must the 
• American opportunity credit: Qualified ed- At the time this publication went to Credit Be Repaiducation expenses include amounts spent print, Congress was considering legis-
on books, supplies, and equipment lation that would extend the tuition and
CAUTION
! (Recaptured)needed for a course of study, whether or fees deduction. If this deduction is in effect, you
not the materials are purchased from the cannot claim an education credit in the same If, after you file your 2010 tax return, you oreducational institution as a condition of en- year you claim a tuition and fees deduction for someone else receives tax-free educational as-rollment or attendance. the same student. To find out if this legislation sistance for, or a refund of, an expense you used
was enacted, and for more details, go to www.• Lifetime learning credit: Qualified educa- to figure an education credit on that return, you
irs.gov/formspubs. Also see Publication 970.tion expenses include only amounts for may have to repay all or part of the credit. You
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 231

Page 234 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2010?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2010 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2010 or the first 3 months of 2011?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
For any part of 2010, were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien
who did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $60,000
($120,000 if married filing jointly) for lifetime learning credit or less than
$90,000 ($180,000 if married filing jointly) for the American opportunity
credit?
Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2010
You can claim
an education credit
for 2010***
You cannot use the same expenses to claim both a lifetime learning credit and an American opportunity credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are considered paid by you.*
Your education credits may be limited to your tax liability minus certain credits. See Form 8863 for more details.***
Page 232 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 235 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must refigure your education credit(s) for 2010 correct column for your filing status and the
as if the assistance or refund was received in number of children you have. Do You Qualify for the2010. Subtract the amount of the refigured credit
Online help. You can use the EITC Assistantfrom the amount of the credit you claimed. The Credit?at www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligibleresult is the amount you must repay. Add the
for the credit. The EITC Assistant is available inrepayment (recapture) to your tax liability for the To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meetEnglish and Spanish.year in which you receive the assistance or all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules forrefund. See the instructions for your tax return EIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in Partfor that year to find out how to report the recap- to provide documents to prove you are entitled B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Partture amount. Your original 2010 tax return does to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu- C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child.not change. ments to send us. These may include: birth There is one final rule you must meet in Part D,
certificates, school records, medical records, Figuring and Claiming the EIC . You qualify for
etc. We will also send you a letter with the name, the credit if you meet all the rules in each partaddress, and telephone number of the IRS em- that applies to you.ployee assigned to your case. The process of
• If you have a qualifying child, the rules inestablishing your eligibility will delay your re-
Parts A, B, and D apply to you.fund.
36. • If you do not have a qualifying child, the
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.
Introduction Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-Earned Income
The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B,
certain people who work and have less than C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rules
Credit (EIC) $48,362 of earned income. A tax credit usually in each part.
means more money in your pocket. It reduces
the amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also Do you have a qualifying child? You have a
give you a refund. qualifying child only if you have a child who
What's New meets the four tests described in Rule 8  andHow do you get the earned income credit?
illustrated in Figure 36-1.To claim the EIC, you must:
Earned income amount is more. The maxi-
1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, andmum amount of income you can earn and still If Improper Claim get the credit has increased. You may be able to 2. File a tax return, even if you:take the credit if: Made in Prior Year
a. Do not owe any tax,• You have three or more qualifying children If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orand you earned less than $43,352 b. Did not earn enough money to file a reduced for any reason other than a math or($48,362 if married filing jointly), return, or clerical error, you must attach a completed Form
• You have two qualifying children and you 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.c. Did not have income taxes withheld
earned less than $40,363 ($45,373 if mar- You must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-from your pay.
ried filing jointly), ing all the rules described in this chapter.
When you complete your return, you can However, if your EIC was denied or reduced• You have one qualifying child and you figure your EIC by using a worksheet in the as a result of a math or clerical error, do notearned less than $35,535 ($40,545 if mar- instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. Forried filing jointly), or Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let the example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRS• You do not have a qualifying child and you IRS figure the credit for you. can correct it. If you do not provide a correctearned less than $13,460 ($18,470 if mar- social security number, the IRS can deny theHow will this chapter help you? This chapterried filing jointly). EIC. These kinds of errors are called math orwill explain the following.
Your adjusted gross income also must be less clerical errors.• The rules you must meet to qualify for thethan the amount in the above list that applies to If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-EIC.you. For details, see Rules 1 and 15. nied and it was determined that your error was
• How to figure the EIC. due to reckless or intentional disregard of the
EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, thenUseful Items you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.What's New for 2011 You may want to see:
More information. See chapter 5 in Publica-After 2010, you can no longer get advance pay- Publication tion 596 for more detailed information about thements of the credit in your pay during the year as
disallowance period and Form 8862.you could in 2010 and earlier years. This is ❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)
because the law has changed. However, if you
are eligible, you will still be able to claim the Form (and Instructions)
credit on your return, as explained in this chap-
❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Creditter. Part A. Rules for(Qualifying Child Information)
❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earned Everyone
Income Credit After Disallowance
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1Reminders
through 7 . You must meet all seven rules to
qualify for the earned income credit. If you do notIncreased EIC on certain joint returns. A meet all seven rules, you cannot get the creditmarried person filing a joint return may get more
and you do not need to read the rest of theEIC than someone with the same income but a
chapter.different filing status. As a result, the EIC table
If you meet all seven rules in this part, thenhas different columns for married persons filing
read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies)jointly than for everyone else. When you look up
for more rules you must meet.your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 233

Page 236 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross 2. You must have a valid 8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency, and joint return age 65. • $43,352 ($48,362 for
• $43,352 ($48,362 for cannot be ªMarried filing tests. 12. You cannot be the married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if separately.º 9. Your qualifying child dependent of another have three or more qualifying
you have three or more 4. You must be a U.S. cannot be used by more person. children,
qualifying children, citizen or resident alien than one person to claim 13. You cannot be a
all year. the EIC. qualifying child of • $40,363 ($45,373 for
• $40,363 ($45,373 for 5. You cannot file Form 10. You cannot be a another person. married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ qualifying child of another 14. You must have have two qualifying children,
you have two qualifying (relating to foreign person. lived in the United
children, earned income). States more than half • $35,535 ($40,545 for
6. Your investment of the year. married filing jointly) if you
• $35,535 ($40,545 for income must be $3,100 have one qualifying child, or 
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you have one qualifying 7. You must have earned • $13,460 ($18,470 for
child, or income. married filing jointly) if you do
not have a qualifying child.
• $13,460 ($18,470 for
married filing jointly) if
you do not have a
qualifying child.
(Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form 1040EZ). YouRule 1. Your AGI Must Be Rule 2. You Must Have a cannot claim the EIC.
Less Than: Valid Social Security Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if
Number (SSN) filing a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can
• $43,352 ($48,362 for married filing jointly) apply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application for
To claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing aif you have three or more qualifying chil- a Social Security Card, with the SSA. You can
joint return) must have a valid SSN issued by thedren, get Form SS-5 online at www.socialsecurity.
Social Security Administration (SSA). Any quali- gov, from your local SSA office, or by calling the• $40,363 ($45,373 for married filing jointly) fying child listed on Schedule EIC also must SSA at 1-800-772-1213.if you have two qualifying children, have a valid SSN. (See Rule 8  if you have a
Filing deadline approaching and still noqualifying child.)• $35,535 ($40,545 for married filing jointly)
SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching andIf your social security card (or your spouse'sif you have one qualifying child, or
you still do not have an SSN, you have twoif filing a joint return) says ªNot valid for employ-• $13,460 ($18,470 for married filing jointly) choices.mentº and your SSN was issued so that you (orif you do not have a qualifying child. your spouse) could get a federally funded bene- 1. Request an automatic 6-month extensionfit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of a of time to file your return. You can get thisAdjusted gross income (AGI). AGI is the federally funded benefit is Medicaid. extension by filing Form 4868, Applicationamount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form If you have a card with the legend ªNot valid for Automatic Extension of Time to File1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is for employmentº and your immigration status U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Forequal to or more than the applicable limit listed has changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen more information, see chapter 1.above, you cannot claim the EIC. or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new
2. File the return on time without claiming thesocial security card without the legend.
EIC. After receiving the SSN, file anExample. Your AGI is $35,550, you are sin- U. S. citizen. If you were a U. S. citizen when amended return (Form 1040X, Amendedgle, and you have one qualifying child. You can- you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim-not claim the EIC because your AGI is not less
ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EICthan $35,535. However, if your filing status was Valid for work only with INS or DHS authori-
if you have a qualifying child.married filing jointly, you might be able to claim zation. If your social security card reads ªValid
the EIC because your AGI is less than $40,545. for work only with INS authorization,º or ªValid
for work only with DHS authorization,º you haveCommunity property. If you are married, Rule 3. Your Filing Statusa valid SSN.but qualify to file as head of household under
Cannot Be Married Filingspecial rules for married taxpayers living apart SSN missing or incorrect. If an SSN for you
(see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu- or your spouse is missing from your tax return or Separatelynity property laws, your AGI includes that portion is incorrect, you may not get the EIC.
of both your and your spouse's wages that you If you are married, you usually must file a jointOther taxpayer identification number. Youare required to include in gross income. This is return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotcannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (ordifferent from the community property rules that be ªMarried filing separately.ºyour spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi-apply under Rule 7. vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). Spouse did not live with you. If you are mar-ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv- ried and your spouse did not live in your home atice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN. any time during the last 6 months of the year,
No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put you may be able to file as head of household,
ªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), line 41a instead of married filing separately. In that case,
Page 234 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 237 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailed • You are reporting income from the rental • Form 4361, Application for Exemption
From Self-Employment Tax for Use byof personal property on Form 1040, lineinformation about filing as head of household,
Ministers, Members of Religious Orders21, orsee chapter 2. 
and Christian Science Practitioners, or• You are a member of a qualified joint ven-
• Form 4029, Application for Exemptionture that is a passive activity reporting onRule 4. You Must Be a 
From Social Security and Medicare TaxesSchedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) rentalU.S. Citizen or Resident and Waiver of Benefits.real estate income not subject to
self-employment tax.Alien All Year
Each approved form exempts certain income
from social security taxes. Each form is dis-If you (or your spouse, if married) were a nonres-
cussed here in terms of what is or is not earnedRule 7. You Must Haveident alien for any part of the year, you cannot
income for the EIC.claim the earned income credit unless your filing Earned Income
status is married filing jointly. You can use that Form 4361. Even if you have an approved
This credit is called the ªearned incomeº creditfiling status only if one spouse is a U.S. citizen or Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-
because, to qualify, you must work and haveresident alien and you choose to treat the non- ing ministerial duties as an employee count as
earned income. If you are married and file a jointresident spouse as a U.S. resident. If you make earned income. This includes wages, salaries,
return, you meet this rule if at least one spouse tips, and other taxable employee compensation.this choice, you and your spouse are taxed on
works and has earned income. If you are an A nontaxable housing allowance or the nontax-your worldwide income. If you (or your spouse, if employee, earned income includes all the tax- able rental value of a home is not earned in-married) were a nonresident alien for any part of able income you get from your employer. If you come. Also, amounts you received forthe year and your filing status is not married are self-employed or a statutory employee, you performing ministerial duties, but not as an em-filing jointly, enter ªNoº on the dotted line next to will figure your earned income on EIC Work- ployee, do not count as earned income. Exam-line 64a (Form 1040) or in the space to the left of sheet B in the instructions for Form 1040. ples include fees for performing marriages andline 41a (Form 1040A). If you need more infor- honoraria for delivering speeches.mation on making this choice, get Publication
Form 4029. Even if you have an approved519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. Earned Income
Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other
Earned income includes all of the following taxable employee compensation count asRule 5. You Cannot File types of income. earned income. However, amounts you re-
ceived as a self-employed individual do notForm 2555 or Form 1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable count as earned income. Also, in figuring earned2555-EZ employee pay. Employee pay is earned income, do not subtract losses on Schedule C,
income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em- C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040. You cannot claim the earned income credit if you ployee pay, such as certain dependent
file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form care benefits and adoption benefits, is not
2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion. earned income. But there is an exception Disability BenefitsYou file these forms to exclude income earned in for nontaxable combat pay, which you can
foreign countries from your gross income, or to choose to include in earned income, as If you retired on disability, taxable benefits you
explained below.deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount. receive under your employer's disability retire-
ment plan are considered earned income untilU.S. possessions are not foreign countries. See 2. Net earnings from self-employment. you reach minimum retirement age. MinimumPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
3. Gross income received as a statutory em- retirement age generally is the earliest age atResident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-
ployee. which you could have received a pension ormation.
annuity if you were not disabled. You must re-
port your taxable disability payments on line 7 ofWages, salaries, and tips. Wages, salaries,Rule 6. Your Investment either Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you reachand tips you receive for working are reported to minimum retirement age.Income Must Be $3,100 or you on Form W-2, in box 1. You should report Beginning on the day after you reach mini-these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (FormsLess mum retirement age, payments you receive are1040A and 1040). taxable as a pension and are not consideredYou cannot claim the earned income credit un- earned income. Report taxable pension pay-Nontaxable combat pay election. You canless your investment income is $3,100 or less. If ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (orelect to include your nontaxable combat pay inyour investment income is more than $3,100, Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b). earned income for the earned income credit.you cannot claim the credit. For most people, Electing to include nontaxable combat pay in Disability insurance payments. Paymentsinvestment income is the total of the following earned income may increase or decrease your you received from a disability insurance policyamounts. EIC. Figure the credit with and without your that you paid the premiums for are not earnednontaxable combat pay before making the elec-• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or income. It does not matter whether you havetion. If you make the election, you must include1040A). reached minimum retirement age. If this policy isin earned income all nontaxable combat pay you through your employer, the amount may be• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 received. If you are filing a joint return and both shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code ªJ.ºor 1040A). you and your spouse received nontaxable com-
bat pay, you can each make your own election.• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or
The amount of your nontaxable combat pay1040A). Income That Is Not Earned Incomeshould be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2
• Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form with code ªQº. Examples of items that are not earned income
1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form include interest and dividends, pensions and
Self-employed persons and statutory em-1040A). annuities, social security and railroad retirement
ployees. If you are self-employed or received benefits (including disability benefits), alimonyIf you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income income as a statutory employee, you must use and child support, welfare benefits, workers'is the total of the amount of line 2 and the the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify compensation benefits, unemployment com-amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to to get the EIC. pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster carethe right of the words ªForm 1040EZº on line 2. payments, and veterans' benefits, including VA
However, see Rule 6 in chapter 1 of Publica- rehabilitation payments. Do not include any of
Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029 these items in your earned income.tion 596 if:
• You are filing Schedule E (Form 1040), This section is for persons who have an ap- Earnings while an inmate. Amounts received
proved:Form 4797, or Form 8814, for work performed while an inmate in a penal
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 235

Page 238 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
institution are not earned income when figuring disabled or a student, he is not a qualifying childRule 8. Your Child Mustthe earned income credit. This includes because, at the end of the year, he was not
Meet the Relationship,amounts for work performed while in a work under age 19.
release program or while in a halfway house. Age, Residency, and Joint Example 2. Your 23-year-old brother, who
Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare Return Tests is a full-time student and unmarried, lives with
payments are not earned income for the EIC. you and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both
These are cash payments certain people re- Your child is a qualifying child if your child meets you and your spouse are 21 years old and you
ceive from a state or local agency that adminis- four tests. The four tests are: file a joint return. Your brother is not your qualify-
ters public assistance programs funded under ing child because he is not younger than you or1. Relationship, the federal Temporary Assistance for Needy your spouse.
Families (TANF) program in return for certain 2. Age, 
work activities such as (1) work experience ac- Example 3. The facts are the same as in3. Residency, andtivities (including remodeling or repairing public Example 2 except that your spouse is 25 years
housing) if sufficient private sector employment old. Because your brother is younger than your4. Joint return.
is not available, or (2) community service pro- spouse, he is your qualifying child even thoughThe four tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1.gram activities. he is not younger than you.The paragraphs that follow contain more infor-
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) pay- mation about each test.
ments. If you were receiving social security Student defined. To qualify as a student, your
retirement benefits or social security disability child must be, during some part of each of any 5
benefits at the time you received any CRP pay- calendar months during the calendar year:Relationship Test
ments, your CRP payments are not earned in-
1. A full-time student at a school that has aTo be your qualifying child, a child must be your:come for the EIC.
regular teaching staff, course of study, and• Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or aCommunity property. If you are married, but regular student body at the school, ordescendant of any of them (for example,qualify to file as head of household under special 2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-your grandchild), orrules for married taxpayers living apart (see ing course given by a school described inRule 3), and live in a state that has community • Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, (1), or a state, county, or local government.property laws, your earned income for the EIC stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of
does not include any amount earned by your The 5 calendar months need not be consecu-any of them (for example, your niece or
spouse that is treated as belonging to you under tive.nephew).
those laws. That amount is not earned income A full-time student is a student who is en-The following definitions clarify the relationshipfor the EIC, even though you must include it in rolled for the number of hours or courses thetest.your gross income on your income tax return. school considers to be full-time attendance.
Your earned income includes the entire amount School defined. A school can be an ele-Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysyou earned, even if part of it is treated as belong- mentary school, junior or senior high school,treated as your own child. The term ªadopteding to your spouse under your state's community college, university, or technical, trade, orchildº includes a child who was lawfully placedproperty laws. mechanical school. However, on-the-job train-with you for legal adoption.
ing courses, correspondence schools, andNontaxable military pay. Nontaxable pay for
schools offering courses only through the In-members of the Armed Forces is not considered Foster child. For the EIC, a person is your ternet do not count as schools for the EIC.earned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax- foster child if the child is placed with you by an
able military pay are combat pay, the Basic authorized placement agency or by judgement, Vocational high school students. Stu-Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basic decree, or other order of any court of competent dents who work in co-op jobs in private industryAllowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica- as a part of a school's regular course of class-jurisdiction. An authorized placement agency in-tion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for more infor- room and practical training are consideredcludes a state or local government agency. Itmation. full-time students.also includes a tax-exempt organization li-
censed by a state. In addition, it includes anCombat pay. You can elect to include
Indian tribal government or an organization au-your nontaxable combat pay in earned Permanently and totally disabled. Yourthorized by an Indian tribal government to placeincome for the EIC. See Nontaxable
TIP child is permanently and totally disabled if bothIndian children.combat pay election, earlier. of the following apply.
Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, was 1. He or she cannot engage in any substan-
placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorized tial gainful activity because of a physical or
agency responsible for placing children in foster mental condition.Part B. Rules homes. Debbie is your foster child. 2. A doctor determines the condition has
If You Have a lasted or can be expected to last continu-
ously for at least a year or can lead toAge TestQualifying Child death.
Your child must be:
If you have met all of the rules in Part A, read
1. Under age 19 at the end of 2010 andPart B to see if you have a qualifying child. Residency Testyounger than you (or your spouse, if filingPart B  discusses Rules 8  through  10 . You
jointly),must meet all three of these rules, in addition to Your child must have lived with you in the Unitedthe rules in Parts A  and D, to qualify for the States for more than half of 2010. The following2. Under age 24 at the end of 2010, a stu-earned income credit with a qualifying child. definitions clarify the residency test.dent, and younger than you (or yourYou must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to spouse, if filing jointly), orclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannot
United States. This means the 50 states and3. Permanently and totally disabled at anyfile Form 1040EZ.) You also must complete
the District of Columbia. It does not includetime during 2010, regardless of age.Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you
Puerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.meet all the rules in Part A and this part, read
Part D to find out what to do next. The following examples and definitions clarify
the age test.If you do not meet Rule 8, you do not Homeless shelter. Your home can be any
have a qualifying child. Read Part C to location where you regularly live. You do not
Example 1. Your son turned 19 on Decem-find out if you can get the earned in- need a traditional home. For example, if your
CAUTION
!
ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totallycome credit without a qualifying child. child lived with you for more than half the year in
Page 236 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 239 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your . . .
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of
any of them (for example, your grandchild)
 
was . . . 
Under age 19 at the end of 2010 and younger than you
                  (or your spouse, if filing jointly) 
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2010, a student, and younger than you 
                             (or your spouse, if filing jointly) 
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year,
regardless of age 
Who lived with you in the United States for more than
half of 2010.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them (for example, your
niece or nephew)
OR
AND
Who is not filing a joint return for 2010 (or is filing a 
joint return for 2010 only as a claim for refund) 
Joint Return
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 237

Page 240 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
one or more homeless shelters, your child Example 2. The facts are the same as in 3. Head of household filing status.
meets the residency test. Example 2 except your son had $2,000 of wages 4. The credit for child and dependent careand no interest income or backup withholding. expenses.Military personnel stationed outside the No taxes were taken out of his pay and he and
United States.  U.S. military personnel sta- 5. The exclusion for dependent care benefits.his wife are not required to file a tax return, but
tioned outside the United States on extended they file a joint return to claim a making work pay 6. The EIC.active duty are considered to live in the United credit of $124 and get a refund of that amount.
States during that duty period for purposes of The other person cannot take any of theseThey file the return to get the making work pay
the EIC. benefits based on this qualifying child. In othercredit, so they are not filing it only as a claim for
words, you and the other person cannot agree torefund. The exception to the joint return testExtended active duty. Extended active divide these tax benefits between you. The otherdoes not apply, so your son is not your qualifyingduty means you are called or ordered to duty for person cannot take any of these tax benefitschild.an indefinite period or for a period of more than unless he or she has a different qualifying child.90 days. Once you begin serving your extended Married child. Even if your child does not file a The tiebreaker rules explained next explainactive duty, you are still considered to have been joint return, if your child was married at the end who, if anyone, can claim the EIC when moreon extended active duty even if you do not serve of the year, he or she cannot be your qualifying than one person has the same qualifying child.more than 90 days. child unless: However, the tiebreaker rules do not apply if the
other person is your spouse and you file a jointBirth or death of a child. A child who was 1. You can claim an exemption for the child, return.born or died in 2010 is treated as having lived orwith you for all of 2010 if your home was the
2. The reason you cannot claim an exemp- Tiebreaker rules. To determine which personchild's home the entire time he or she was alive
tion for the child is that you let the child's can treat the child as a qualifying child to claimin 2010.
other parent claim the exemption under the the six tax benefits just listed, the following
Special rule for divorced or separated par-Temporary absences. Count time that you or tiebreaker rules apply.
ents or parents who live apart, describedyour child is away from home on a temporary • If only one of the persons is the child'slater.absence due to a special circumstance as time parent, the child is treated as the qualify-the child lived with you. Examples of a special ing child of the parent.circumstance include illness, school attend- Social security number. Your qualifying childance, business, vacation, military service, and • If the parents do not file a joint return to-must have a valid social security number (SSN)detention in a juvenile facility. gether but both parents claim the child asunless the child was born and died in 2010 and a qualifying child, the IRS will treat theyou attach to your return a copy of the child'sKidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treated child as the qualifying child of the parentbirth certificate, death certificate, or hospital rec-as living with you for more than half of the year if with whom the child lived for the longerords showing a live birth. You cannot claim thethe child lived with you for more than half the period of time during the year. If the childEIC on the basis of a qualifying child if:part of the year before the date of the kidnap- lived with each parent for the same
ping. The child must be presumed by law en- amount of time, the IRS will treat the child1. Your qualifying child's SSN is missing from
forcement authorities to have been kidnapped as the qualifying child of the parent whoyour tax return or is incorrect,
by someone who is not a member of your family had the higher adjusted gross income2. Your qualifying child's social security cardor your child's family. This treatment applies for (AGI) for the year.says ªNot valid for employmentº and wasall years until the child is returned. However, the • If no parent can claim the child as a quali-issued for use in getting a federally fundedlast year this treatment can apply is the earlier fying child, the child is treated as the quali-benefit, orof: fying child of the person who had the3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child highest AGI for the year.1. The year there is a determination that the has:child is dead, or • If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
a. An individual taxpayer identification ing child but no parent does so claim the2. The year the child would have reached
number (ITIN), which is issued to a child, the child is treated as the qualifyingage 18.
noncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or child of the person who had the highestIf your qualifying child has been kidnapped AGI for the year, but only if that person'sb. An adoption taxpayer identificationand meets these requirements, enter ªKC,º in- AGI is higher than the highest AGI of anynumber (ATIN), which is issued tostead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC. of the child's parents who can claim theadopting parents who cannot get an child. If the child's parents file a joint returnSSN for the child being adopted until with each other, this rule can be appliedthe adoption is final.Joint Return Test by treating the parents' total AGI as di-
vided evenly between them. See ExampleIf you have more than one qualifying childTo meet this test, the child cannot file a joint 8.and only one has a valid SSN, you can claim thereturn for the year.
EIC only on the basis of that child. For more Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and theinformation about SSNs, see Rule 2.Example. You supported your 18-year-old other person may be able to choose which ofdaughter, and she lived with you all year while you claims the child as a qualifying child. Seeher husband was in the Armed Forces. The Rule 9. Your Qualifying Examples 1  through 13.couple files a joint return. Because your daugh-
If you cannot claim the EIC because yourChild Cannot Be Used Byter filed a joint return, she is not your qualifying
qualifying child is treated under the tiebreakerchild. More Than One Person To rules as the qualifying child of another person for
Claim the EIC 2010, you may be able to take the EIC using aException. An exception to the joint return
different qualifying child, but you cannot take thetest applies if your child and his or her spouse
Sometimes a child meets the tests to be a quali- EIC using the rules in Part C for people who dofile a joint return only as a claim for refund.
fying child of more than one person. Although not have a qualifying child.
the child meets the tests to be a qualifying childExample 1. Your 18-year-old son and his
of each of these persons, only one person can17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income If the other person cannot claim the EIC. If
actually treat the child as a qualifying child. Onlyand no earned income. Neither is required to file you and someone else have the same qualifying
that person can use the child as a qualifyinga tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter- child but the other person cannot claim the EIC
child to take all of the following tax benefitsest income due to backup withholding, so they because he or she is not eligible or his or her
(provided the person is eligible for each benefit).filed a joint return only to get a refund of the earned income or AGI is too high, you may be
withheld taxes. The exception to the joint return able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See1. The exemption for the child.test applies, so your son may be your qualifying Examples 6 and 7. But you cannot treat the child
child if all the other tests are met. 2. The child tax credit. as a qualifying child to claim the EIC if the other
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 241 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person uses the child to claim any of the other Example 7. The facts are the same as in Example 12. The facts are the same as in
six tax benefits listed earlier. Example 11  except that you and your son'sExample 1 except that you earned $50,000 from
Examples. The following examples may father both claim your son as a qualifying child.your job and your AGI is $50,500. Your earned
help you in determining whether you can claim In this case, only your son's father will be al-income is too high for you to claim the EIC. But
the EIC when you and someone else have the lowed to treat your son as a qualifying child. Thisyour mother cannot claim the EIC either, be-
same qualifying child. is because his AGI, $14,000, is more than yourcause her AGI is not higher than yours.
AGI, $12,000. You cannot claim the EIC (either
Example 1. You and your 2-year-old son with or without a qualifying child).Example 8. The facts are the same as in
Jimmy lived with your mother all year. You are Example 1 except that you and Jimmy's father
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Example 13. You and your 7-year-oldare married to each other, live with Jimmy and
Your only income was $9,000 from a part-time niece, your sister's child, lived with your motheryour mother, and have an AGI of $30,000 on a
job. Your mother's only income was $20,000 all year. You are 25 years old, and your AGI isjoint return. If you and your husband do not claim
from her job, and her AGI is $20,000. Jimmy's $9,300. Your only income was from a part-timeJimmy as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of
father did not live with you or Jimmy. The special job. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Her onlythe other tax benefits listed earlier, your mother
rule explained later for divorced or separated income was from her job. Your niece's parentscan claim him instead. Even though the AGI on
parents or parents who live apart does not apply. file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, andyour joint return, $30,000, is more than your
Jimmy is a qualifying child of both you and your do not live with you or their child. Your niece is amother's AGI of $20,000, for this purpose half of
mother because he meets the relationship, age, qualifying child of both you and your motherthe joint AGI can be treated as yours and half as
residency, and joint return tests for both you and because she meets the relationship, age, resi-your husband's. In other words, each parent's
your mother. However, only one of you can treat dency, and joint return tests for both you andAGI can be treated as $15,000.
him as a qualifying child to claim the EIC (and your mother. However, only your mother can
the other tax benefits listed earlier for which that treat her as a qualifying child. This is becauseExample 9. You, your husband, and your
person qualifies). He is not a qualifying child of your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more than your10-year-old son Joey lived together until August
anyone else, including his father. If you do not AGI, $9,300.1, 2010, when your husband moved out of the
claim Jimmy as a qualifying child for the EIC or household. In August and September, Joeyany of the other tax benefits listed earlier, your Special rule for divorced or separated par-lived with you. For the rest of the year, Joey livedmother can treat him as a qualifying child to ents or parents who live apart. A child will bewith your husband, who is Joey's father. Joey isclaim the EIC (and any other tax benefits listed treated as the qualifying child of his or her non-a qualifying child of both you and your husbandearlier for which she qualifies). custodial parent (for purposes of claiming anbecause he lived with each of you for more than
exemption and the child tax credit, but not for thehalf the year and because he met the relation-Example 2. The facts are the same as in EIC) if all of the following apply.ship, age, and joint return tests for both of you.Example 1 except your AGI is $25,000. Because At the end of the year, you and your husband still 1. The parents:your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she were not divorced, legally separated, or sepa-cannot claim Jimmy as a qualifying child. Only rated under a written separation agreement, so a. Are divorced or legally separated underyou can claim him. the special rule for divorced or separated par- a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
ents or parents who apart does not apply. nance,Example 3. The facts are the same as in You and your husband will file separate re-Example 1 except that you and your mother both b. Are separated under a written separa-turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat Joeyclaim Jimmy as a qualifying child. In this case, tion agreement, oras a qualifying child. This means, if your hus-you as the child's parent will be the only one band does not claim Joey as a qualifying child c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6allowed to claim Jimmy as a qualifying child for for any of the tax benefits listed earlier, you can months of 2010, whether or not they arethe EIC and the other tax benefits listed earlier claim him as a qualifying child for any tax benefit or were married.for which you qualify. The IRS will disallow your listed for which you qualify. However, your filingmother's claim to the EIC and any other tax status is married filing separately, so you cannot 2. The child received over half of his or herbenefits listed earlier unless she has another
claim the EIC or the credit for child and depen- support for the year from the parents.qualifying child.
dent care expenses. See Rule 3. 3. The child is in the custody of one or both
Example 4. The facts are the same as in parents for more than half of 2010.Example 10. The facts are the same as inExample 1 except that you also have two other
4. Either of the following statements is true.Example 9 except that you and your husbandyoung children who are qualifying children of
both claim Joey as a qualifying child. In thisboth you and your mother. Only one of you can a. The custodial parent signs Form 8332case, only your husband will be allowed to treatclaim each child. However, if your mother's AGI or a substantially similar statement thatJoey as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-is higher than yours, you can allow your mother he or she will not claim the child as aing 2010, the boy lived with him longer than withto claim one or more of the children. For exam- dependent for the year, and the non-you. You cannot claim the EIC (either with orple, if you claim one child, your mother can claim custodial parent attaches the form orwithout a qualifying child). However, your hus-the other two. statement to his or her return. If theband's filing status is married filing separately, divorce decree or separation agreementso he cannot claim the EIC or the credit for childExample 5. The facts are the same as in went into effect after 1984 and beforeand dependent care expenses. See Rule 3.Example 1 except that you are only 18 years old. 2009, the noncustodial parent may beThis means you are a qualifying child of your able to attach certain pages from theExample 11. You, your 5-year-old son andmother. Because of Rule 10 discussed next, you decree or agreement instead of Formyour son's father lived together all year. You andcannot claim the EIC and cannot claim Jimmy as 8332.your son's father are not married. Your son is aa qualifying child. Only your mother may be able
qualifying child of both you and his father be- b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-to treat Jimmy as a qualifying child to claim the
cause he meets the relationship, age, residency, rate maintenance or written separationEIC. If your mother meets all the other require-
and joint return tests for both you and his father. agreement that applies to 2010 pro-ments for claiming the EIC and you do not claim
Your earned income and AGI are $12,000, and vides that the noncustodial parent canJimmy as a qualifying child for any of the other
your son's father's earned income and AGI are claim the child as a dependent, and thetax benefits listed earlier, your mother can claim
$14,000. Neither of you had any other income. noncustodial parent provides at leastboth you and Jimmy as qualifying children for
Your son's father agrees to let you treat the child $600 for support of the child duringthe EIC.
as a qualifying child. This means, if your son's 2010.
father does not claim your son as a qualifyingExample 6. The facts are the same as in
child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefitsExample 1  except that your mother earned
listed earlier, you can claim him as a qualifying For details, see chapter 3. Also see Applying$50,000 from her job. Because your mother's
child for the EIC and any other tax benefits listed Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents or par-earned income is too high for her to claim the
ents who live apart, next.EIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son. for which you qualify.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 239

Page 242 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated b. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a Death of spouse. If you are filing a joint return
with your spouse who died in 2010, you meet thestudent, and younger than that personparents or parents who live apart. If a child
age test if your spouse was at least age 25 but(or that person's spouse, if the personis treated as the qualifying child of the noncus-
under age 65 at the time of death.files jointly), ortodial parent under the special rule just de-
scribed for children of divorced or separated c. Permanently and totally disabled, re- Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried.parents or parents who live apart, only the non- gardless of age. You meet the age test.custodial parent can claim an exemption and the
child tax credit for the child. However, the custo- 3. You lived with that person in the United Example 2. You are married and filing adial parent, if eligible, or another eligible tax- States for more than half of the year. joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse ispayer, can claim the child as a qualifying child
age 27. You meet the age test because your4. You are not filing a joint return for the yearfor the EIC and other tax benefits listed earlier. If
spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.(or are filing a joint return only as a claimthe child is the qualifying child of more than one
for refund).person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker Example 3. You are married and filing arules determine which person can treat the child For more details about the tests to be a qualify- joint return with your spouse who died in Augustas a qualifying child. ing child, see Rule 8. 2010. You are age 67. Your spouse would have
If you (or your spouse, if filing a joint return) been age 65 in November 2010. Because yourExample 1. You and your 5-year-old son are a qualifying child of another person, you spouse was under age 65 when she died, youlived all year with your mother, who paid the cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the meet the age test.entire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is person for whom you are a qualifying child does$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claimson's father did not live with you or your son. Rule 12. You Cannot Bethe EIC. Put ªNoº beside line 64a (Form 1040) orUnder the special rule for children of divorced or line 41a (Form 1040A). the Dependent of Anotherseparated parents or parents who live apart,
Personyour son is treated as the qualifying child of his Example. You and your daughter lived with
father, who can claim an exemption and the your mother all year. You are 22 years old, If you are not filing a joint return, you meet thischild tax credit for the child. However, your son's unmarried, and attended a trade school full time. rule if:father cannot claim your son as a qualifying child You had a part-time job and earned $5,700. You
for head of household filing status, the credit for • You checked box 6a on Form 1040 orhad no other income. Because you meet the
child and dependent care expenses, the exclu- 1040A, orrelationship, age, residency, and joint return
sion for dependent care benefits, or the EIC. tests, you are a qualifying child of your mother. • You did not check the ªYouº box on line 5You and your mother did not have any child care She can claim the EIC if she meets all the other of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $9,350expenses or dependent care benefits. If you do requirements. Because you are your mother's on that line.not claim your son as a qualifying child, your qualifying child, you cannot claim the EIC. This
mother can claim him as a qualifying child for the is so even if your mother cannot or does not If you are filing a joint return, you meet thisEIC and head of household filing status, if she claim the EIC. rule if:qualifies for these tax benefits.
• You checked both box 6a and box 6b on
Form 1040 or 1040A, orExample 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1 except that your AGI is $25,000 and • You and your spouse did not check eitherPart C. Rulesyour mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can- the ªYouº box or the ªSpouseº box on linenot claim your son as a qualifying child for any 5 of Form 1040EZ, and you enteredIf You Do Not Havepurpose because her AGI is not higher than $18,700 on that line.yours. a Qualifying Child If you are not sure whether someone else canExample 3. The facts are the same as in claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)Read this part if you:Example 1 except that you and your mother both as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a
claim your son as a qualifying child for the EIC. dependent in chapter 3.1. Do not have a qualifying child, and
Your mother also claims him as a qualifying child If someone else can claim you (or your2. Have met all the rules in Part A.for head of household filing status. You as the spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent onchild's parent will be the only one allowed to his or her return, but does not, you still cannot
claim your son as a qualifying child for the EIC. Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You must claim the credit.
The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to the meet all four of these rules, in addition to the
EIC and head of household filing status unless rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the earned Example 1. In 2010, you were age 25, sin-
she has another qualifying child. income credit without a qualifying child. gle, and living at home with your parents. You
worked and were not a student. You earnedIf you have a qualifying child, the rules $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as aRule 10. You Cannot Be a in this part do not apply to you. You can dependent. When you file your return, you claimclaim the credit only if you meet all the
CAUTION
!Qualifying Child of an exemption for yourself by not checking therules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 to find out ªYouº box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and byAnother Person if you have a qualifying child. entering $9,350 on that line. You meet this rule.
You are a qualifying child of another person
Example 2. The facts are the same as in(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all Rule 11. You Must Be at
Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Yourof the following statements are true. Least Age 25 but Under parents can claim you as a dependent but de-
1. You are that person's son, daughter, cide not to. You do not meet this rule. YouAge 65
stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, cannot claim the credit because your parents
you are that person's brother, sister, half You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 at could have claimed you as a dependent.
brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- the end of 2010. If you are married filing a joint
ter (or the child or grandchild of that per- return, either you or your spouse must be at Rule 13. You Cannot Be ason's brother, sister, half brother, half least age 25 but under age 65 at the end of
Qualifying Child ofsister, stepbrother, or stepsister). 2010. It does not matter which spouse meets the
age test, as long as one of the spouses does. Another Person2. You were:
If neither you nor your spouse meets the age
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year and test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put ªNoº next to You are a qualifying child of another person
younger than that person (or that per- line 64a (Form 1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or (your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all
son's spouse, if the person files jointly), line 9a (Form 1040EZ). of the following statements are true.
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 243 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You are that person's son, daughter, active duty (defined in Rule 8), are considered to • Pension or annuity from deferred compen-
stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, live in the United States during that duty period sation plans.
you are that person's brother, sister, half for purposes of the EIC.
brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- Scholarship or fellowship grants not re-ter (or the child or grandchild of that per- ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship or fel-son's brother, sister, half brother, half lowship grant that was not reported to you on asister, stepbrother, or stepsister). Part D. Figuring and Form W-2 is not considered earned income for
2. You were: the earned income credit.
Claiming the EIC
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year and Inmate's income. Amounts received for work
younger than that person (or that per- performed while an inmate in a penal institutionRead this part if you have met all the rules in
son's spouse, if the person files jointly), are not earned income for the earned incomeParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.
credit. This includes amounts received for workPart D  discusses Rule 15.  You must meetb. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a performed while in a work release program orthis rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and B,student (as defined in Rule 8), and while in a halfway house. If you received anyor Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in-younger than that person (or that per- amount for work done while an inmate in a penalcome credit.son's spouse, if the person files jointly), institution and that amount is included in the totalThis part of the chapter also explains how toor on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1figure the amount of your credit. You have twoc. Permanently and totally disabled, re- (Form 1040EZ), put ªPRIº and the amount on thechoices.gardless of age. dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in the
1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you space to the left of the entry space for line 7
3. You lived with that person in the United want to do this, see IRS Will Figure the (Form 1040A), or in the space to the left of line 1
States for more than half of the year. EIC for You. (Form 1040EZ).
4. You are not filing a joint return for the year 2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do Pension or annuity from deferred compensa-(or are filing a joint return only as a claim this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself. tion plans. A pension or annuity from a non-for refund). qualified deferred compensation plan or a
For more details about the tests to be a nongovernmental section 457 plan is not consid-Rule 15. Your Earnedqualifying child, see Rule 8. ered earned income for the earned income
If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) Income Must Be Less credit. If you received such an amount and it was
are a qualifying child of another person, you included in the total on line 7 (Form 1040 orThan:cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put
person for whom you are a qualifying child does ªDFCº and the amount on the dotted line next to
• $43,352 ($48,362 for married filing jointly)not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim line 7 (Form 1040), in the space to the left of the
if you have three or more qualifying chil-the EIC. Put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in the
dren,line 41a (Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form space to the left of line 1 (Form 1040EZ). This
1040EZ). amount may be reported in box 11 of your Form• $40,363 ($45,373 for married filing jointly)
W-2. If you received such an amount but box 11if you have two qualifying children,Example. You lived with your mother all is blank, contact your employer for the amount
• $35,535 ($40,545 for married filing jointly)year. You are age 26, unmarried, and perma- received as a pension or annuity.
if you have one qualifying child, ornently and totally disabled. Your only income Clergy. If you are a member of the clergywas from a community center where you went • $13,460 ($18,470 for married filing jointly) who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2three days a week to answer telephones. You if you do not have a qualifying child. of that schedule includes an amount that wasearned $5,000 for the year and provided more also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtractthan half of your own support. Because you Earned income generally means wages, sala- that amount from the amount on line 7 (Formmeet the relationship, age, residency, and joint ries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net 1040) and enter the result in the first space ofreturn tests, you are a qualifying child of your earnings from self-employment. Employee pay the worksheet in Step 5  of the Form 1040 in-mother for the EIC. She can claim the EIC if she is earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable structions for lines 64a and 64b. Put ªClergyº onmeets all the other requirements. Because you employee pay, such as certain dependent care the dotted line next to line 64a (Form 1040).are a qualifying child of your mother, you cannot benefits and adoption benefits, is not earnedclaim the EIC. This is so even if your mother Church employees.  A church employeeincome. But there is an exception for nontaxablecannot or does not claim the EIC. means an employee (other than a minister orcombat pay, which you can choose to include in
member of a religious order) of a church orearned income. Earned income is explained in
qualified church-controlled organization that isdetail in Rule 7.Rule 14. You Must Have exempt from employer social security and Medi-
Lived in the United States care taxes. If you received wages as a churchFiguring earned income. If you are
employee and included any amount on both lineself-employed, a statutory employee, or a mem-More Than Half of the Year 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040),ber of the clergy or a church employee who files
subtract that amount from the amount on line 7Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure yourYour home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint
(Form 1040) and enter the result in the firstearned income when you fill out Part 4 of EICreturn) must have been in the United States for
space of the worksheet in Step 5 of the FormWorksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.more than half the year.
1040 instructions for lines 64a and 64b.If it was not, put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form Otherwise, figure your earned income by us-
1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form ing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040
1040EZ). instructions for lines 64a and 64b or the Form IRS Will Figure
1040A instructions for lines 41a and 41b, or theUnited States. This means the 50 states and the EIC for Youworksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-the District of Columbia. It does not include tions for lines 9a and 9b. The IRS will figure your EIC for you if you followPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam. When using one of those worksheets to fig- the steps explained in this section.ure your earned income, you will start with theHomeless shelter. Your home can be any
amount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or Do not ask the IRS to figure your EIClocation where you regularly live. You do not
line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that unless you are eligible for it. Read theneed a traditional home. If you lived in one or
amount by any amount included on that line and rules in Parts A, B, C, and D to see if
CAUTION
!more homeless shelters in the United States for
described in the following list. you qualify.more than half the year, you meet this rule.
• Scholarship or fellowship grants not re- If you want the IRS to also figure theMilitary personnel stationed outside the ported on a Form W-2, amount of your income tax, see chap-United States. U.S. military personnel sta-
ter 30.tioned outside the United States on extended • Inmate's income, and
TIP
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 241

Page 244 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Complete all other parts of your return that 1. Go to your form instruction booklet andForm 1040
turn to the instructions for lines 9a and 9bapply to you, but do not fill in lines 10, 12a,
If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figure and look for the EIC Worksheet.or 13.
your credit for you, follow these steps. 2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to
its instructions. Find the amount of your1. Put ªEICº on the dotted line next to line How To Figure the credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-64a. Then, if you have any of the types of tion booklet.EIC Yourselfincome described earlier under Inmate's
income, Pension or annuity from deferred 3. Enter the amount of your earned incomeTo figure the EIC yourself, use the EIC Work- credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet oncompensation plans, or Clergy, follow the sheet in the instructions for the form you are Form 1040EZ, line 9a.instructions given there. using (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form
1040EZ). 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
Do not attach it to your income tax return.are electing to include it in your earned
Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you fileincome for the EIC, enter the amount on
Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,line 64b. For details, see Nontaxable com-
follow these steps.bat pay election in Rule 7.
3. Complete all other parts of your return that Examples1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
apply to you (including line 59), but do not turn to the instructions for lines 64a and
The following two comprehensive examples64b, and look for Worksheet A or Work-fill in lines 72, 73, 74a, and 76. If you do
(complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful.sheet B.not have a qualifying child, stop here.
2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies4. If you have a qualifying child, complete 1. John and Janet Smith, a married couple
to your situation according to its instruc-Schedule EIC according to its instructions. with one qualifying child and using Form
tions. Complete Worksheet B if you were 1040A.Be sure to enter the child's social security
self-employed at anytime in 2010, a mem-number on line 2 of that schedule. If you 2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with nober of the clergy or a church employeedo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.who files Schedule SE, or a statutory em-allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-
ployee filing Schedule C or C-EZ. Find theturn. amount of your credit in the EIC Table in Example 1. John and Janetyour instruction booklet.
Smith (Form 1040A)3. Enter the amount of your earned incomeForm 1040A credit from Worksheet A or B on Form John and Janet Smith are married and will file a
1040, line 64a.If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 3
your credit for you, follow these steps. years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for all4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
of 2010. John worked and earned $9,500. JanetDo not attach it to your income tax return.1. Put ªEICº to the left of the entry space for worked part of the year and earned $1,500.If you do not have a qualifying child, stopline 41a. Then, if you have any of the types Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. Johnhere.of income described earlier under Inmate's and Janet qualify for the earned income credit
income or Pension or annuity from de- 5. If you have a qualifying child, complete and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Schedule
ferred compensation plans, follow the in- Schedule EIC according to its instructions. EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC to
Be sure to enter the child's social securitystructions given there. Form 1040A when they send their completed
number on line 2 of that schedule. If you return to the IRS.2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- They took the following steps to completeare electing to include it in your earned allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.income for the EIC, enter the amount on turn.line 41b. For details, see Nontaxable com-
bat pay election in Rule 7. Completing Schedule EICForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file3. Complete all other parts of your return that Form 1040A and want to figure the credit your- The Smiths complete Schedule EIC becauseapply to you (including line 36), but do not self, follow these steps. they have a qualifying child. They enter ªJohnfill in lines 44, 45, 46a, and 48. If you do and Janet Smithº and John's SSN (the SSN thatnot have a qualifying child, stop here. 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line atturn to the instructions for lines 41a and4. If you have a qualifying child, complete the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then fill out41b, and look for the EIC Worksheet.Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Qualifying Child Information (lines 1 ± 6).
2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according toBe sure to enter the child's social security
its instructions. Find the amount of yournumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you
credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc- Completing the EIC Worksheetdo not, your credit may be reduced or dis-
tion booklet.allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-turn. 3. Enter the amount of your earned income sheet to figure their earned income credit.credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on
Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (theirForm 1040A, line 41a.
earned income).Form 1040EZ 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned IncomeDo not attach it to your income tax return.If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS to Credit Table in the Form 1040A instructions.If you do not have a qualifying child, stopfigure your credit for you, follow these steps. The Smiths find their income of $11,000 withinhere.
the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They follow1. Put ªEICº in the space to the left of line 9a. 5. If you have a qualifying child, complete this line across to the column that describes theirThen if you have any of the types of in- Schedule EIC according to its instructions. filing status and number of children and findcome described earlier under Inmate's in- Be sure to enter the child's social security $3,050. They enter $3,050 on line 2.come or Pension or annuity from deferred number on line 2 of that schedule. If you Line 3. The Smiths enter their AGI ofcompensation plans, follow the instructions do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- $11,000.allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-given there.
turn. Line 4. The Smiths check the ªYesº box2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).are electing to include it in your earned They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2income for the EIC, enter the amount on Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you file ($3,050) on line 6.line 9b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-
Line 6. The Smiths' EIC is $3,050.self, follow these steps.bat pay election in Rule 7.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 245 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE EIC  
(Form 1040A or 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Earned Income Credit
Qualifying Child Information
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040   
                  only if you have a qualifying child. 
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
EIC 
`
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 43
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number 
Before you begin: 
F!
CAUTION
• See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 41a and 41b, or Form 1040, lines 64a and 64b, to make 
sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child. 
• Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s social security card. 
Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s 
social security card is not correct, call the Social Security Administration at 1-800-772-1213.  
• If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up to 10 years. See page 2 of 
schedule for details. 
• It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply for each qualifying child. 
Qualifying Child Information Child 1 Child 2 Child 3
1   Child’s name 
If you have more than three qualifying 
children, you only have to list three to get 
the maximum credit. 
First name Last name First name Last name First name Last name 
2   Child’s SSN 
The child must have an SSN as defined in 
the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 41a 
and 41b, or Form 1040, lines 64a and 64b,
unless the child was born and died in 
2010. If your child was born and died in 
2010 and did not have an SSN, enter 
“Died” on this line and attach a copy of 
the child’s birth certificate, death 
certificate, or hospital medical records. 
3   Child’s year of birth 
Year 
If born after 1991 and the child was 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1991 and the child was 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1991 and the child was 
younger than you (or your spouse, if 
filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
4 a Was the child under age 24 at the end of 
2010, a student, and younger than you (or 
your spouse, if filing jointly)? 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
b Was the child permanently and totally 
disabled during any part of 2010? 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
5   Child’s relationship to you 
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,  
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.) 
6   Number of months child lived 
with you in the United States 
during 2010 
• If the child lived with you for more than 
half of  2010 but less than 7 months,  
enter “7.” 
• If the child was born or died in 2010 and 
your  home was the child’s home for the 
entire time he or she was alive during  
2010, enter “12.” 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax 
return instructions. 
Cat. No. 13339M Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2010 
John and Janet Smith 222-00-2222
Amy Smith
000-00-2223
2007
daughter
12
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 243

Page 246 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 41a and 41b
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 39.
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table on pages 42–58 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 42–58 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 41a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 41a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $7,500
($12,500 if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $16,450
($21,500 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 39 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2010.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
11,000
11,000
3,050
3,050
√
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

STOP
CAUTION
!
Page 247 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI).Completing the EIC WorksheetExample 2. Kelly Green
Line 4. Kelly checks the ªNoº box becauseKelly figures the amount of her earned income(Form 1040EZ) lines 1 and 3 are not the same.credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows.
Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student. Line 5. Kelly checks the ªYesº box becauseLine 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in-She lived with her parents in the United States the amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less thancome).for all of 2010. She had a part-time job and $7,500. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the
earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned Income amount from line 2, $457, on line 6.
savings account. She is not eligible to be Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet. Line 6. She enters $457 here and on Formclaimed as a dependent on her parents' return. She finds her earned income of $6,240 in the 1040EZ, line 9a. Kelly's earned income credit isAlthough she lived with her parents, she is not range of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line $457.their qualifying child because she does not meet across to the column that describes her filing
the age test. She does not have any children. status and finds $457. She enters $457 on line
Kelly qualifies for the earned income credit. 2.
Kelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete the
EIC Worksheet.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) WorksheetÐLines 9a and 9b Keep for Your Records
1. Enter your earned income from Step 2 on page 14 ......................... . 1. 6,240
2. Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ................................................................ . 2. 457
If line 2 is zero, 
STOP You cannot take the credit. Enter ªNoº in the space to the left of line 9a.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4 .............................. . 3. 6,260
4. Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Yes.  Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
ú No. Go to line 5.
5. Is the amount on line 3 less than $7,500 ($12,500 if married filing jointly)?
ú Yes.  Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ........................................................ . 5.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
6. Earned income credit. Enter this amount on Form 1040EZ, line 9a ............................... . 6. 457
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see above to find out if you must file Form
8862 to take the credit for 2010.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 245

Page 248 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer ªYesº to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: M M
• $13,460 ($18,470 for married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $35,535 ($40,545 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
• $40,363 ($45,373 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
• $43,352 ($48,362 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) M M
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? M M
(See Rule 3.)
Caution: If you or your spouse is a nonresident alien, answer ªYesº only if your filing status is married
filing jointly. (See Rule 4.)
4. Answer ªYesº if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer ªNo.º M M
(See Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $3,100 or less? (See Rule 6.) M M
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: M M
• $13,460 ($18,470 for married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $35,535 ($40,545 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
• $40,363 ($45,373 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
• $43,352 ($48,362 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another person. M M
Otherwise, answer ªNo.º (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10 ± 12. If you do not
have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10 ± 12.*
8. Does your child meet the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for a qualifying child? M M
(See Rule 8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer ªYesº if (a) your qualifying child does not meet the M M
tests to be a qualifying child of any other person or (b) your qualifying child meets the tests to be a
qualifying child of another person but you are the person entitled to treat the child as a qualifying child
under the tiebreaker rules explained in Rule 9. Answer ªNoº if the other person is the one entitled to treat
the child as a qualifying child under the tiebreaker rules.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2010? M M
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on anyone M M
else's return. Answer ªNoº if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed as a dependent on
someone else's return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse's if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half the M M
year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC.
Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ. If you
answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7 and ªNoº to question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if you can claim
the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you
can claim the EIC.
If you answered ªNoº to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Page 246 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 249 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Refundable credit for prior year minimum ❏ 8911 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling
Property Credittax.
❏ 8912 Credit to Holders of Tax Credit• Credit for excess social security tax or rail-37. Bondsroad retirement tax withheld.
❏ 8936 Qualified Plug-in Electric DriveSeveral other credits are discussed in other Motor Vehicle Creditchapters in this publication.Other Credits
• Child and dependent care credit (chapter
32).
• Credit for the elderly or the disabled Nonrefundable CreditsWhat's New
(chapter 33).
The credits discussed in this part of the chapter• Child tax credit (chapter 34).Government retiree credit. This credit has
can reduce your tax. However, if the total ofexpired. It is not available for 2010. • Education credits (chapter 35). these credits is more than your tax, the excess is
not refunded to you.Adoption credit. The maximum adoption • Earned income credit (chapter 36).
credit increases to $13,170. This credit is now
refundable. Also, new documentation require- Alternative Motor VehicleNonrefundable credits. The first part of thisments apply. See Adoption Credit for more in- chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers ten Creditformation. credits that you subtract from your tax. These
credits may reduce your tax to zero. If these You may be able to take a credit if you place anFirst-time homebuyer credit. You generally
alternative motor vehicle in service in 2010.credits are more than your tax, the excess is notcannot claim the credit for a home you bought
refunded to you.after April 30, 2010. However, you may be able Alternative motor vehicle. An alternativeto claim the credit if you entered into a written motor vehicle is a new vehicle that qualifies asRefundable credits. The second part of thisbinding contract before May 1, 2010, to buy the one of the following four types of vehicles.chapter, Refundable Credits, covers sevenhome before July 1, 2010, and actually bought
• Qualified hybrid vehicle (must weigh 8,500credits that are treated as payments and arethe home before October 1, 2010. Also, certain
pounds or less).refundable to you. These credits are added tomembers of the Armed Forces and certain other
the federal income tax withheld and any esti-taxpayers have additional time to buy a home • Advanced lean burn technology vehicle.mated tax payments you made. If this total isand take the credit. See First-Time Homebuyer
• Qualified alternative fuel vehicle.more than your total tax, the excess will beCredit.
refunded to you. • Qualified fuel cell vehicle.Recapture of first-time homebuyer credit. If
A credit is also allowed for the cost of convertingyou claimed the first-time homebuyer credit for a Useful Items a vehicle to a qualified plug-in electric drivehome you bought in 2008, you generally must You may want to see: vehicle.begin repaying it on your 2010 return. In addi-
tion, you generally must repay any credit you Publication At the time this publication went toclaimed for 2008 or 2009 if you sold your home
print, Congress was considering legis-❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expensesin 2010 or the home stopped being your main
lation that would extend this credit to(Including the Health Coverage Taxhome in 2010. See First-Time Homebuyer
CAUTION
!
certain qualified hybrid vehicles weighing moreCredit)Credit.
than 8,500 pounds. To find out if this legislation❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for was enacted, and for more details, go to www.Individuals irs.gov/formspubs.
❏ 530 Tax Information for HomeownersIntroduction Amount of credit. Generally, you can rely on
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements the manufacturer's (or, in the case of a foreignThis chapter discusses the following nonrefund- (IRAs) manufacturer, its domestic distributor's) certifi-able credits. cation that a specific make, model, and model
Form (and Instructions)• Alternative motor vehicle credit. year vehicle qualifies for the credit and the
amount of the credit for which it qualifies.❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property Ordinarily the amount of the credit is 100% ofEstate, or Trust)credit. the manufacturer's (or domestic distributor's)
❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder of• Credit to holders of tax credit bonds. certification of the maximum credit allowable.
Undistributed Long-Term Capital However, the credit for converting a vehicle to a• Foreign tax credit. Gains qualified plug-in electric drive vehicle is the
• Mortgage interest credit. smaller of (a) $4,000, or (b) 10% of the cost of❏ 5405 First-Time Homebuyer Credit and
the conversion.Repayment of the Credit• Nonrefundable credit for prior year mini- If you purchased a qualified hybrid vehiclemum tax. ❏ 5695 Residential Energy Credits weighing 8,500 pounds or less or an advanced
• Plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit. lean burn technology vehicle from a manufac-❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit
turer who previously sold at least 60,000 of• Plug-in electric vehicle credit. ❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax these vehicles, the amount of your credit may be
Ð Individuals, Estates, and Trusts• Residential energy credits. reduced. Your manufacturer should give you the
information you need to figure your reduced❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage• Retirement savings contributions credit. credit. Also see the Form 8910 instructions.Subsidy
This chapter also discusses the following re- See the Form 8910 instructions for a❏ 8834 Qualified Plug-in Electric andfundable credits. list of vehicles for which the credit isElectric Vehicle Credit reduced or not allowed.
CAUTION
!• Adoption credit. ❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses
• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. ❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement How to take the credit. To take the credit, you
must complete Form 8910 and attach it to yourSavings Contributions• First-time homebuyer credit.
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit• Health coverage tax credit. Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and enter
❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit• Making work pay credit. ª8910º on the line next to that box.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 247

Page 250 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information. For more information on Interest income. The amount of any tax credit in connection with a new mortgage for the
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8910. allowed (figured before applying tax liability lim- purchase of your main home.
its) must be included as interest income on your Amount of credit. Figure your credit on Formtax return.Alternative Fuel Vehicle 8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal to
(or smaller than) the certified indebtednessHow to take the credit. Complete Form 8912Refueling Property Credit (loan) amount shown on your MCC, enter onand attach it to your Form 1040. Include the
Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid oncredit in your total for Form 1040, line 53. CheckYou may be able to take a credit if you place
your mortgage during the year.box c, and enter ª8912º on the line next to thatqualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling prop-
If your mortgage loan amount is larger thanbox.erty in service in 2010.
the certified indebtedness amount shown on
More information. For more information, see your MCC, you can figure the credit on only partQualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling
the instructions for Form 8912. of the interest you paid. To find the amount toproperty. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle re-
enter on line 1, multiply the total interest youfueling property is any property (other than a
paid during the year on your mortgage by thebuilding or its structural components) used to Foreign Tax Credit following fraction.store or dispense alternative fuel into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle propelled by the fuel, but You generally can choose to take income taxes
only if the storage or dispensing is at the point you paid or accrued during the year to a foreign Certified indebtednesswhere the fuel is delivered into the tank. country or U.S. possession as a credit against amount on your MCCyour U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct themThe following are alternative fuels.
as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22). Original amount of your• Any fuel at least 85% of the volume of mortgageYou cannot take a credit (or deduction) forwhich consists of one or more of the fol- foreign income taxes paid on income that youlowing: ethanol, natural gas, compressed Limit based on credit rate. If the certificateexclude from U.S. tax under any of the following.natural gas, liquefied natural gas, liquefied credit rate is more than 20%, the credit you arepetroleum gas, or hydrogen. 1. Foreign earned income exclusion. allowed cannot be more than $2,000. If two or
more persons (other than a married couple filing• Any mixture which consists of two or more 2. Foreign housing exclusion.
a joint return) hold an interest in the home toof the following: biodiesel, diesel fuel, or 3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from which the MCC relates, this $2,000 limit must bekerosene, and at least 20% of the volume U.S. tax. divided based on the interest held by each per-of which consists of biodiesel determined
son. See Publication 530 for more information.without regard to any kerosene. 4. Possession exclusion.
Carryforward. Your credit (after applying the• Electricity.
limit based on the credit rate) is also subject to aLimit on the credit. Unless you can elect not
limit based on your tax that is figured using Formto file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), yourAmount of the credit. For personal use prop- 8396. If your allowable credit is reduced be-foreign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S.erty, the credit is generally the smaller of 50% of cause of this tax liability limit, you can carrytax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by athe property's cost or $2,000. For business use forward the unused portion of the credit to thefraction. The numerator of the fraction is yourproperty, the credit is generally the smaller of next 3 years or until used, whichever comes first.taxable income from sources outside the United50% of the property's cost or $50,000. The If you are subject to the $2,000 limit becauseStates. The denominator is your total taxableamounts are different for hydrogen refueling your certificate credit rate is more than 20%, youincome from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub-property. cannot carry forward any amount more thanlication 514 for more information.
$2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you mustHow to take the credit. To take the credit, you How to take the credit. Complete Form 1116 divide the credit).must complete Form 8911 and attach it to your and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit
How to take the credit. Figure your 2010Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for on Form 1040, line 47.
credit and any carryforward to 2011 on FormForm 1040, line 53. Check box c and enter
Exception. You do not have to complete 8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sureª8911º on the line next to that box.
Form 1116 to take the credit if all of the following to include any credit carryforward from 2007,
apply.More information. For more information on 2008, and 2009.
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8911. Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,• All of your foreign source gross income
line 53. Check box c on that line and enterwas passive income, which generally in-
ª8396º in the space next to that box.cludes interest and dividends.Credit to Holders of Tax
Reduced home mortgage interest deduction.• All of your foreign source gross incomeCredit Bonds If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Aand the foreign tax paid on it were re-
(Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort-Tax credit bonds are bonds in which the holder ported to you on a qualified payee state-
gage interest deduction by the amount of thereceives a tax credit in lieu of some or all of the ment, which includes Form 1099-INT and
mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396,interest on the bond. Form 1099-DIV.
line 3. You must do this even if part of thatYou may be able to take a credit if you are a • The total of your creditable foreign taxes amount is to be carried forward to 2011. Forholder of one of the following bonds. was not more than $300 ($600 if married more information about the home mortgage in-
filing jointly).• Clean renewable energy bonds (issued terest deduction, see chapter 23.
before 2010). • You elect this procedure for the tax year. Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy. If
• New clean renewable energy bonds. you received an MCC with your mortgage loan,
For more details on these requirements, see you may have to recapture (pay back) all or part• Qualified energy conservation bonds. the instructions for Form 1116. of the benefit you received from that program.
• Midwestern tax credit bonds. The recapture may be required if you sell or
dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9Mortgage Interest Credit• Qualified forestry conservation bonds. years after the date you closed your mortgage
• Qualified school construction bonds. loan. See chapter 15 for more information.The mortgage interest credit is intended to help
lower-income individuals own a home. If you• Qualified zone academy bonds.
qualify, you can take the credit each year for part Nonrefundable Credit for• Build America bonds. of the home mortgage interest you pay.
Prior Year Minimum Tax
In some instances, an issuer may elect to Who qualifies. You may be eligible for the
receive a credit for interest paid on the bond. If credit if you were issued a qualified mortgage The tax laws give special treatment to some
the issuer makes this election, you cannot also credit certificate (MCC)  from your state or local kinds of income and allow special deductions
claim a credit. government. Generally, an MCC is issued only and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you
Page 248 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 251 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at a. Has a capacity of at least 4 kilowatt paid your proportionate share of any costs of the
least a minimum amount of tax in addition to any hours, and association or corporation for purposes of these
other tax on these items. This is called the alter- credits.b. Is capable of being recharged from annative minimum tax. external source of electricity. Nonbusiness energy property credit. YouThe special treatment of some items of in-
may be able to take a credit of 30% of the costscome and expenses only allows you to postpone
paid or incurred in 2010 for any qualified energypaying tax until a later year. If in prior years you How to take the credit. To take the credit, you
efficiency improvements and any residential en-paid alternative minimum tax because of these must complete Form 8936 and attach it to your
ergy property.tax postponement items, you may be able to Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for
The credit is limited to a total of $1,500 overtake a credit for prior year minimum tax against Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and enter
2009 and 2010.your current year's regular tax. ª8936º on the line next to that box.
Qualified energy efficiency improvementsYou may be able to take a credit against your
are the following improvements that are new,regular tax if for 2009 you had: Plug-in Electric Vehicle can be expected to remain in use at least 5• An alternative minimum tax liability and years, and meet certain requirements for energyCreditadjustments or preferences other than ex- efficiency.clusion items, You may be able to take this credit if you ac- • Any insulation material or system that isquired a qualified plug-in electric vehicle in• A minimum tax credit that you are carrying specifically and primarily designed to re-2010. For this credit, the vehicle can have 2, 3,forward to 2010, or duce heat loss or gain of a home.or 4 wheels. A vehicle with 4 wheels must be a• An unallowed qualified electric vehicle • Exterior windows (including skylights).low speed vehicle.credit. Generally, you can rely on the manufac- • Exterior doors.turer's (or, in the case of a foreign manufacturer,
• Any metal or asphalt roof that has appro-its domestic distributor's) certification that a ve-Refundable credit. If you had a minimum tax
priate pigmented coatings or cooling gran-hicle qualifies for the credit.credit carryforward to 2008 (on your 2007 Form
ules specifically and primarily designed to8801, line 28), you may qualify for a refund of Amount of credit. The credit is 10% of the reduce heat gain of the home.that credit amount. For more information, see cost of the vehicle, limited to $2,500 per vehicle.Refundable Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax ,
Residential energy property is any of the fol-later. Qualified vehicle. A qualified plug-in electric lowing.vehicle is a motor vehicle the original use ofHow to take the credit. Figure your 2010 which starts with you and that: • Certain heat pump water heaters; electricnonrefundable credit (if any), and any carryfor- heat pumps; central air conditioners; natu-ward to 2011 on Form 8801, and attach it to your 1. Is acquired for your use or lease and not ral gas, propane, or oil water heaters; andForm 1040. Include the credit in your total for for resale, stoves that use biomass fuel.Form 1040, line 53, and check box b. You can 2. Is made by a manufacturer,carry forward any unused credit for prior year • Qualified natural gas, propane, or oil fur-
minimum tax to later years until it is completely naces; and qualified natural gas, propane,3. Is manufactured primarily for use on public
used. or oil hot water boilers.streets, roads, and highways,
• Certain advanced main air circulating fans4. Has a gross vehicle weight rating of lessMore information. For more information
used in natural gas, propane, or oil fur-than 3,000 pounds if it has 4 wheels andabout the credit, see the instructions for Form
naces.less than 14,000 pounds if it has 2 or 38801.
wheels,
Residential energy efficient property credit.5. Is a low speed vehicle if it has 4 wheels,Plug-in Electric Drive
You may be able to take a credit of 30% of yourandMotor Vehicle Credit costs of qualified solar electric property, solar6. Is propelled to a significant extent by an water heating property, fuel cell property, smallYou may be able to take this credit if you placed electric motor that draws electricity from a wind energy property, and geothermal heatin service for business or personal use a quali- battery that: pump property. The credit amount for costs paidfied plug-in electric drive motor vehicle in 2010. for qualified fuel cell property is limited to $500a. Has a capacity of at least 4 kilowattGenerally, you can rely on the manufac- for each one-half kilowatt of capacity of the prop-hours (2.5 kilowatt hours in the case ofturer's (or, in the case of a foreign manufacturer, erty.a vehicle with 2 or 3 wheels), andits domestic distributor's) certification that a ve-
hicle qualifies for the credit. b. Is capable of being recharged from an Basis reduction. You must reduce the basis
external source of electricity. of your home by the amount of any credit al-Amount of credit. The amount of the credit lowed.varies depending on the battery capacity and
ranges from $2,500 to $7,500 per vehicle. How to take the credit. To take the credit, you How to take the credit. Complete Form 5695
must complete Form 8834 and attach it to your and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditQualified vehicle. A qualified plug-in electric Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for on Form 1040, line 52.drive motor vehicle is a motor vehicle the original Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and enteruse of which starts with you and that: ª8834º on the line next to that box. More information. For more information on
this credit, see the instructions for Form 5695.1. Has at least four wheels,
Residential Energy Credits2. Is acquired for your use or lease and not Retirement Savingsfor resale, You may be able to take one or both of the Contributions Creditfollowing credits if you made energy saving im-3. Is made by a manufacturer,
provements to your home located in the United (Saver's Credit)4. Is manufactured primarily for use on public States in 2010.streets, roads, and highways, You may be able to take this credit if you, or your• Nonbusiness energy property credit.5. Has a gross vehicle weight rating of less spouse if filing jointly, made:
• Residential energy efficient propertythan 14,000 pounds, • Contributions (other than rollover contribu-credit.6. Is a motor vehicle for purposes of the tions) to a traditional or Roth IRA,
Clean Air Act, and If you are a member of a condominium man- • Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b)
7. Is propelled to a significant extent by an agement association for a condominium you plan (including designated Roth contribu-
electric motor that draws electricity from a own or a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative tions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, or
battery that: housing corporation, you are treated as having SIMPLE plan,
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 249

Page 252 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Voluntary employee contributions to a Nonqualified expenses. Qualified adop- Domestic adoptions that are not final. For
qualified retirement plan (including the fed- domestic adoptions that are not final, you musttion expenses do not include expenses:
eral Thrift Savings Plan), or include an adoption taxpayer identification num-• That violate state or federal law, ber, obtained for the child, on your tax return or• Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan. • For carrying out any surrogate parenting provide a copy of one of the following docu-
arrangement, ments.However, you cannot take the credit if either of
the following applies. • For the adoption of your spouse's child, 1. A home study completed by an authorized
placement agency.• For which you received funds under any1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, or
federal, state, or local program,Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $27,750 2. A placement agreement with an authorized
($41,625 if head of household; $55,500 if placement agency.• Allowed as a credit or deduction under anymarried filing jointly). other federal income tax rule, or 3. A document signed by a hospital official
2. The person(s) who made the qualified con- authorizing the release of a newborn child• Paid or reimbursed by your employer ortribution or elective deferral (a) was born from the hospital to you for legal adoption.any other person or organization.after January 1, 1993, (b) is claimed as a 4. A court document ordering or approvingdependent on someone else's 2010 tax re- the placement of a child with you for legalEligible child. The term ªeligible childº meansturn, or (c) was a student (defined next). adoption.any individual:
Student. You were a student if during any part 5. An original affidavit or notarized statement,• Under 18 years old, orof 5 calendar months of 2010 you: signed under penalties of perjury, from an
• Physically or mentally incapable of caring adoption attorney, government official, or• Were enrolled as a full-time student at a for himself or herself. other person, stating that he or she (a)school, or placed or is placing a child with you for
Child with special needs. An eligible child• Took a full-time, on-farm training course legal adoption or (b) is facilitating the
is a child with special needs if all three of thegiven by a school or a state, county, or adoption process for you in an official ca-
following apply.local government agency. pacity.
1. The child was a citizen or resident of theSchool. A school includes a technical, Adoptions of special needs children. IfUnited States (including U.S. possessions)trade, or mechanical school. It does not include you are adopting a special needs child, you alsoat the time the adoption process began.an on-the-job training course, correspondence must attach a copy of the state determination of
school, or school offering courses only through special needs to your tax return.2. A state (including the District of Columbia)
the Internet. has determined that the child cannot or
should not be returned to his or her par- For more information, including what documentsHow to take the credit. Figure the credit on ents' home. to include for adoptions finalized outside of theForm 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040,
United States, see the instructions for Formline 50, or your Form 1040A, line 32, and attach 3. The state has determined that the child will 8839.Form 8880 to your return. not be adopted unless assistance is pro-
vided to the adoptive parents. Factors
How to take the credit. To take the credit, youused by states to make this determination
must complete Form 8839 and attach it and yourinclude:
adoption-related documents to your Form 1040.Refundable Credits a. The child's ethnic background, Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,
line 71, and check box b on that line.The credits discussed in this part of the chapter b. The child's age,
are treated as payments of tax. If the total of c. Whether the child is a member of a mi-these credits, withheld federal income tax, and Credit for Tax onnority or sibling group, andestimated tax payments is more than your total Undistributed Capital Gaintax, the excess can be refunded to you. d. Whether the child has a medical condi-
tion or a physical, mental, or emotional You must include in your income any amounts
handicap. that regulated investment companies (com-Adoption Credit
monly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-
You may be able to take a tax credit of up to ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital
When to take the credit. Generally, until the$13,170 for qualified expenses paid to adopt an gain distributions, even if you did not actually
adoption becomes final, you take the credit ineligible child. The credit may be allowed for the receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a
adoption of a child with special needs even if you the year after your qualified expenses were paid tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit
do not have any qualified expenses. or incurred. If the adoption becomes final, you for the tax since it is considered paid by you. The
If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI) take the credit in the year your expenses were mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439,
is more than $182,520, your credit is reduced. If paid or incurred. See the instructions for Form Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed
your modified AGI is $222,520 or more, you 8839 for more specific information on when to Long-Term Capital Gains, showing your share
cannot take the credit. take the credit. of the undistributed capital gains and the tax
paid, if any. Take the credit for the tax paid byQualified adoption expenses. Qualified Foreign child. If the child is not a U.S. citi- entering the amount on Form 1040, line 71, andadoption expenses are reasonable and neces- zen or resident at the time the adoption process checking box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 tosary expenses directly related to, and whose began, you cannot take the credit unless the your return. See Capital Gain Distributions  inprincipal purpose is for, the legal adoption of an adoption becomes final. You treat all adoption chapter 8 for more information on undistributedeligible child. These expenses include: expenses paid or incurred in years before the capital gains. adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the• Adoption fees, year it becomes final.
• Court costs, First-Time Homebuyer
Substantiation requirements. For 2010, you• Attorney fees, Credit
must include a copy of one or more adop-• Travel expenses (including amounts spent tion-related documents with your return to claim In general, you can claim this credit if:for meals and lodging) while away from the credit. • You bought your main home in the Unitedhome, and
Adoption finalized in the United States. States before May 1, 2010 (before Octo-• Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreign For a domestic or foreign adoption finalized in ber 1, 2010, if you entered into a writtenchild. the United States, you must provide a copy of an binding contract before May 1, 2010, to
adoption order or decree. buy the home before July 1, 2010), and.
Page 250 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 253 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You (and your spouse, if married) did not For more information about related persons, you die, your surviving spouse must repay
own any other main home during the see Nondeductible Loss in chapter 2 of Publi- his or her half of the credit if required.
3-year period ending on the date of cation 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of • In some cases, there is an exception forpurchase. Assets. members of the uniformed services or For-
No credit is allowed for a home bought after April eign Service and for intelligence commu-Amount of the credit. Generally, the credit is30, 2010 (after September 30, 2010, if you en- nity employees.the smaller of:tered into a written binding contract before May
• $8,000 ($4,000 if married filing sepa-1, 2010, to buy the home before July 1, 2010). Home bought in 2008. If you claimed the
rately), or credit for a home you bought in 2008, you gener-
Special rule for long-time residents of same ally must begin repaying it on your 2010 return.• 10% of the purchase price of the home.main home. Even if you are not a first-time In addition, you generally must repay any credit
However, if the Special rule for long-time re-homebuyer, you may be able to claim the credit you claimed for a home you bought in 2008 if
sidents of same main home described earlierif: you sold the home in 2010 or the home stopped
applies, the credit can be no more than $6,500 being your main home in 2010. However, you do
1. You buy a main home in the United States ($3,250 if married filing separately). not have to repay the credit if one of the excep-
before May 1, 2010 (before October 1, tions to the repayment rule applies.You are allowed the full amount of the credit if2010, if you entered into a written binding your MAGI is $125,000 or less ($225,000 or lesscontract before May 1, 2010, to buy the How to take the credit. To take the credit,if married filing jointly). The credit is reduced ifhome before July 1, 2010), and complete Form 5405 and attach it to your FormMAGI is more than $125,000 ($225,000 if mar- 1040. Enter your credit on Form 1040, line 67.2. You (and your spouse, if married) owned ried filing jointly). The credit is completely elimi-
and used the same home as your main nated if MAGI is $145,000 ($245,000 if married How to repay the credit. If you are required tohome for any period of 5 consecutive filing jointly) or more. repay the credit, complete Parts III and IV ofyears during the 8-year period ending on Form 5405. Attach the form to your Form 1040.Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).the date of purchase of the home de- Include the repayment on Form 1040, line 59,Your MAGI is the amount from Form 1040, linescribed in (1). and check box c.38, increased by the total of any:
• Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico, and More information. For more information, in-Main home. Your main home is the one you
cluding special rules for members of the Armed• Amount from Form 2555, line 45 and linelive in most of the time. It can be a house,
Forces, see  Form 5405 and its instructions.50; Form 2555-EZ, line 18; and Formhouseboat, mobile home, cooperative apart-
4563, line 15.ment, or condominium.
Health Coverage Tax
Home constructed by you. If you con- Repayment of credit. If you bought the home Creditstructed your main home, you are treated as after 2008, you generally must repay the credit ifhaving bought it on the date you first occupied it. you dispose of the home or the home stops You may be able to take this credit for any month
being your main home within the 36-month pe- in which all the following statements were trueWho cannot claim the credit. You cannot riod beginning on the purchase date. This in- on the first day of the month.claim the credit if any of the following apply. cludes situations where you sell the home, you
• You were an eligible trade adjustment as-convert it to business or rental property, the1. You are a nonresident alien. sistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAAhome is destroyed, condemned, or disposed of
(ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAAunder threat of condemnation, or the lender2. Your home is located outside the United (RTAA) recipient, or Pension Benefitforecloses on the mortgage. You repay theStates. Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) pension re-credit by including it as additional tax on the3. You sell the home, or it stops being your cipient (defined later).return for the year the home stops being yourmain home, before the end of 2010. main home. If the home continues to be your • You were covered by a qualified health
main home for at least 36 months beginning on4. You acquired your home by gift or inheri- insurance plan for which you paid the en-
the purchase date, you do not have to repay anytance. tire premiums, or your portion of the pre-
of the credit. miums, directly to your health plan5. Your modified adjusted gross income (including months for which you paid pre-If you and your spouse claim the credit on a(MAGI) is $145,000 or more ($245,000 or miums to ªU.S. Treasury±HCTCº).joint return, each spouse is treated as havingmore if married filing jointly). See Modified
been allowed half of the credit for purposes ofadjusted gross income (MAGI), later. • You were not entitled to Medicare Part Arepaying the credit. or enrolled in Medicare Part B.6. Your purchase price is more than
Exceptions. The following are exceptions$800,000. • You were not enrolled in Medicaid or theto the repayment rule. Children's Health Insurance Program7. You can be claimed as a dependent on (CHIP).• If you sell the home to someone who issomeone else's return.
not related to you, the repayment in the • You were not enrolled in the Federal Em-8. You (and your spouse, if married) were year of sale is limited to the amount of ployees Health Benefits program (FEHBP)younger than 18 when you bought the gain on the sale. (See item 9 earlier under or eligible to receive benefits under thehome. Who cannot claim the credit for the defini- U.S. military health system (TRICARE).tion of a related person.) When figuring9. You acquired your home from a related • You were not imprisoned under federal,the gain, reduce the adjusted basis of theperson. A related person includes: state, or local authority.home by the amount of the credit.
a. Your spouse, ancestors (parents, • Your employer did not pay 50% or more of• If the home is destroyed, condemned, orgrandparents, etc.), or lineal descend- the cost of coverage.disposed of under threat of condemnation,ants (children, grandchildren, etc.). and you acquire a new main home within • You did not receive a 65% COBRA pre-b. Your spouse's ancestors or lineal de- 2 years of the event, you do not have to mium reduction from your former employerscendants. repay the credit. or COBRA administrator.
c. A corporation in which you directly or • If, as part of a divorce settlement, the But, you cannot take the credit if you can beindirectly own more than 50% in value home is transferred to a spouse or former claimed as a dependent on someone else'sof the outstanding stock of the corpora- spouse, the spouse who receives the 2010 tax return. If you meet all of these condi-tion. home is responsible for repaying the credit tions, you may be able to take a credit of up toif required. 80% of the amount you paid for qualified healthd. A partnership in which you directly or
insurance coverage for you and any qualifyingindirectly own more than 50% of the • If you die, repayment of the credit is not
family members. You cannot take the credit forcapital interest or profits interest. required. If you file a joint return and then
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 251

Page 254 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
insurance premiums on coverage that was par- 8885, line 2. For details, see Publication 502 or Credit for Excess Socialtially paid for with a National Emergency Grant. Form 8885.
Security Tax or RailroadThe amount you paid for qualified health insur-
ance coverage must be reduced by any Archer Retirement Tax WithheldMore information. For definitions and specialMSA and health savings account distributions
rules, including those relating to qualified healthused to pay for the coverage. Most employers must withhold social security
insurance plans, qualifying family members, the tax from your wages. If you work for a railroadYou can take this credit on your tax return or effect of certain life events, and em- employer, that employer must withhold tier 1have it paid on your behalf in advance to your
ployer-sponsored health insurance plans, see railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTAinsurance company. If the credit is paid on your
tax.Publication 502 and the instructions for Formbehalf in advance, that amount will reduce the
8885.amount of the credit you can take on your tax If you worked for two or more employers in
return. 2010, you may have had too much social secur-
ity or tier 1 RRTA tax withheld from your pay.Making Work Pay CreditTAA recipient. You were an eligible TAA re- You can claim the excess social security or tier 1cipient on the first day of the month if, for any day RRTA tax as a credit against your income tax.You may be able to take this credit if you havein that month or the prior month, you: The following table shows the maximum amountearned income from work. You cannot take the
of wages subject to tax and the maximum• Received a trade readjustment allowance, credit if your modified adjusted gross income amount of tax that should have been withheld foror (AGI) is $95,000 ($190,000 if married fiing 2010.jointly) or more, you are a nonresident alien, or• Would have been entitled to receive such
an allowance except that you had not ex- you can be claimed as a dependent on someone Maximum tax
Maximum that shouldhausted all rights to any unemployment else's return. wages have beeninsurance (except additional compensa- Type of tax subject to tax withheldThe credit is 6.2% of your earned income buttion that is funded by a state and is not
cannot be more than $400 ($800 if married filing Social security orreimbursed from any federal funds) to
RRTA tier 1 $106,800 $6,621.60jointly).which you were entitled (or would be enti-
RRTA tier 2 $79,200 $3,088.80tled if you applied).  The credit is reduced if:
All wages are subject to Medicare tax1. Your modified AGI is more than $75,000Example. You received a trade adjustment withholding.($150,000 if married filing jointly), orallowance for January 2010. You were an eligi-
CAUTION
!
ble TAA recipient on the first day of January and 2. You received a $250 economic recovery
February. payment in 2010. You may have received Use Form 843, Claim for Refund and
an economic recovery payment in 2010 if: Request for Abatement, to claim a re-Alternative TAA recipient. You were an eligi-
fund of excess tier 2 RRTA tax. Be sureble alternative TAA recipient on the first day of
TIP a. You received social security benefits, to attach a copy of all of your W-2 forms. See thethe month if, for that month or the prior month, supplemental security income, railroad worksheet in Publication 505, Tax Withholdingyou received benefits under an alternative trade retirement benefits, or veterans disabil- and Estimated Tax, to help you figure the excessadjustment assistance program for older work- ity compensation or pension benefits in amount.ers established by the Department of Labor. November 2008, December 2008, or
January 2009, andExample. You received benefits under an Employer's error. If any one employer with-
alternative trade adjustment assistance pro- held too much social security or tier 1 RRTA tax,b. You did not receive an economic recov-
gram for older workers for October 2010. The you cannot take the excess as a credit againstery payment in 2009.program was established by the Department of your income tax. The employer should adjust
Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re- the tax for you. If the employer does not adjust
cipient on the first day of October and Novem- the overcollection, you can file a claim for refund
ber. How to take the credit. To take the credit, using Form 843.
complete Schedule M (Form 1040A or 1040)RTAA recipient. You were an eligible RTAA and attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter Joint return. If you are filing a joint return, yourecipient on the first day of the month if, for that cannot add the social security or tier 1 RRTA taxyour credit on Form 1040, line 63, or Formmonth or the prior month, you received benefits withheld from your spouse's wages to the1040A, line 40. If you are filing Form 1040-EZ,under a reemployment trade adjustment assis- amount withheld from your wages. Figure theyou can take the credit on line 8 of that form andtance program for older workers established by
withholding separately for you and your spousedo not have to file Schedule M.the Department of Labor.
to determine if either of you has excess with-
holding.PBGC pension recipient. You were an eligi- Refundable Credit for Priorble PBGC pension recipient on the first day of
the month, if both of the following apply. How to figure the credit if you did not workYear Minimum Tax
for a railroad. If you did not work for a railroad1. You were age 55 or older on the first day If you paid the alternative minimum tax for 2009 during 2010, figure the credit as follows:of the month. or you had a minimum tax credit carryforward to
2. You received a benefit for that month that 2010, you may be able to take a credit for prior 1. Add all social security tax withheld
was paid by the PBGC under title IV of the (but not more than $6,621.60 foryear minimum tax. For information about the
each employer). Enter the total Employee Retirement Income Security Act nonrefundable credit for prior year minimum tax here ................... .of 1974 (ERISA). you may be able to take, see Nonrefundable
2. Enter any uncollected socialCredit for Prior Year Minimum Tax, earlier. How-If you received a lump-sum payment from the security tax on tips or group-termever, for 2010, you may qualify for a refundablePBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2) life insurance included in the totalabove for any month that you would have re- credit for prior year minimum tax if you had a on Form 1040, line 60 ....... .
ceived a PBGC benefit if you had not received minimum tax credit carryforward to 2008 (on 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 orthe lump-sum payment. your 2007 Form 8801, line 28) and you have not less, stop here. You cannot take 
used all of that carryforward, even if the total the credit ................ .How to take the credit. To take the credit, amount of your current year credit is more than 4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,621.60complete Form 8885 and attach it to your Form your total tax liability. To figure the amount of1040. Include your credit in the total for Form 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.any 2010 refundable credit, complete Part IV of1040, line 71, and check box d. Enter the result here and on Form
Form 8801. Include any refundable credit onYou must attach invoices and proof of pay- 1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, line
Form 1040, line 71, and check box c. 44) ................... .ment for any amounts you include on Form
Page 252 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 255 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are married and file a joint 4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,621.60 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 or
return with your spouse who had no gross in- less, stop here. You cannot take 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.come in 2010. During 2010, you worked for the the credit ................ .Enter the result here and on FormBrown Technology Company and earned 1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, line 4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA $60,000 in wages. Social security tax of $3,720 44) ................... . $508.40 tax limit ................. . 6,621.60
was withheld. You also worked for another em- 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.ployer in 2010 and earned $55,000 in wages. How to figure the credit if you worked for a Enter the result here and on Form$3,410 of social security tax was withheld from railroad. If you were a railroad employee at 1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, linethese wages. Because you worked for more any time during 2010, figure the credit as fol- 44) ................... .
than one employer and your total wages were lows:
more than $106,800, you can take a credit of How to take the credit. Enter the credit on
$508.40 for the excess social security tax with- Form 1040, line 69, or include it in the total for1. Add all social security and tier 1held. Form 1040A, line 44.RRTA tax withheld (but not more
than $6,621.60 for each employer).
Enter the total here ......... .1. Add all social security tax withheld
(but not more than $6,621.60 for 2. Enter any uncollected socialeach employer). Enter the total security and tier 1 RRTA tax on tipshere ................... . $7,130.00 or group-term life insurance
included in the total on Form 1040,2. Enter any uncollected social
line 60 ................. .security tax on tips or group-term
life insurance included in the total
on Form 1040, line 60 ....... . -0-
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 or
less, stop here. You cannot take the
credit .................. . 7,130.00
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 253

Page 256 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See the instructions for line 44 that begin on page
2010 35 to see if you must use the Tax Table below to
figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Tax Table Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First, they
find the $25,300±25,350 taxable income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the column.
The amount shown where the taxable income line and filing
status column meet is $2,961. This is the tax amount they
should enter on Form 1040, line 44.
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,365
3,373
3,380
3,388
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
2,946
2,954
2,961
2,969
3,365
3,373
3,380
3,388
3,186
3,194
3,201
3,209
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
0 5 0 0 0 0 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131 2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
5 15 1 1 1 1 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134 2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
15 25 2 2 2 2 1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136 2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
25 50 4 4 4 4 1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
50 75 6 6 6 6 1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 28175 100 9 9 9 9 1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144 2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
100 125 11 11 11 11 1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146 2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
125 150 14 14 14 14 1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149 2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
150 175 16 16 16 16 1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291175 200 19 19 19 19 1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
200 225 21 21 21 21 1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
225 250 24 24 24 24 1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
250 275 26 26 26 26 1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161275 300 29 29 29 29 3,0001,625 1,650 164 164 164 164
300 325 31 31 31 31 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303325 350 34 34 34 34 1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169 3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308350 375 36 36 36 36 1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313375 400 39 39 39 39 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318400 425 41 41 41 41 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323425 450 44 44 44 44 1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179 3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328450 475 46 46 46 46 1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181 3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333475 500 49 49 49 49 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184 3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338500 525 51 51 51 51 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186 3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343525 550 54 54 54 54 1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189 3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348550 575 56 56 56 56 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353575 600 59 59 59 59 1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358600 625 61 61 61 61 1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196 3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363625 650 64 64 64 64 1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199 3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368650 675 66 66 66 66 3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373675 700 69 69 69 69 2,000 3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378700 725 71 71 71 71 2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201 3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383725 750 74 74 74 74 2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204 3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388750 775 76 76 76 76 2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206 3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393775 800 79 79 79 79 2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209 3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398800 825 81 81 81 81 2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211825 850 84 84 84 84 4,0002,125 2,150 214 214 214 214850 875 86 86 86 86 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216875 900 89 89 89 89 4,000 4,050 403 403 403 4032,175 2,200 219 219 219 219 4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408900 925 91 91 91 91 2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221 4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413925 950 94 94 94 94 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224 4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418950 975 96 96 96 96 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226975 1,000 99 99 99 99 4,200 4,250 423 423 423 4232,275 2,300 229 229 229 229 4,250 4,300 428 428 428 4282,300 2,325 231 231 231 2311,000 4,300 4,350 433 433 433 4332,325 2,350 234 234 234 234 4,350 4,400 438 438 438 4381,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236 4,400 4,450 443 443 443 4431,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239 4,450 4,500 448 448 448 4481,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241 4,500 4,550 453 453 453 4531,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244 4,550 4,600 458 458 458 4581,100 1,125 111 111 111 111 2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246 4,600 4,650 463 463 463 4631,125 1,150 114 114 114 114 2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249 4,650 4,700 468 468 468 4681,150 1,175 116 116 116 116 2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251 4,700 4,750 473 473 473 4731,175 1,200 119 119 119 119 2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254 4,750 4,800 478 478 478 4781,200 1,225 121 121 121 121 2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256 4,800 4,850 483 483 483 4831,225 1,250 124 124 124 124 2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259 4,850 4,900 488 488 488 4881,250 1,275 126 126 126 126 2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261 4,900 4,950 493 493 493 4931,275 1,300 129 129 129 129 2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264 4,950 5,000 498 498 498 4982,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 254 -

Page 257 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
5,000 8,000 11,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803 11,000 11,050 1,235 1,103 1,235 1,103
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 8,050 8,100 808 808 808 808 11,050 11,100 1,243 1,108 1,243 1,108
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 8,100 8,150 813 813 813 813 11,100 11,150 1,250 1,113 1,250 1,113
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 8,150 8,200 818 818 818 818 11,150 11,200 1,258 1,118 1,258 1,118
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 8,200 8,250 823 823 823 823 11,200 11,250 1,265 1,123 1,265 1,123
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 8,250 8,300 828 828 828 828 11,250 11,300 1,273 1,128 1,273 1,128
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 8,300 8,350 833 833 833 833 11,300 11,350 1,280 1,133 1,280 1,133
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 8,350 8,400 838 838 838 838 11,350 11,400 1,288 1,138 1,288 1,138
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 8,400 8,450 845 843 845 843 11,400 11,450 1,295 1,143 1,295 1,143
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 8,450 8,500 853 848 853 848 11,450 11,500 1,303 1,148 1,303 1,148
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 8,500 8,550 860 853 860 853 11,500 11,550 1,310 1,153 1,310 1,153
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 8,550 8,600 868 858 868 858 11,550 11,600 1,318 1,158 1,318 1,158
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 8,600 8,650 875 863 875 863 11,600 11,650 1,325 1,163 1,325 1,163
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 8,650 8,700 883 868 883 868 11,650 11,700 1,333 1,168 1,333 1,168
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 8,700 8,750 890 873 890 873 11,700 11,750 1,340 1,173 1,340 1,173
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 8,750 8,800 898 878 898 878 11,750 11,800 1,348 1,178 1,348 1,178
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 8,800 8,850 905 883 905 883 11,800 11,850 1,355 1,183 1,355 1,183
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 8,850 8,900 913 888 913 888 11,850 11,900 1,363 1,188 1,363 1,188
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 8,900 8,950 920 893 920 893 11,900 11,950 1,370 1,193 1,370 1,193
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598 8,950 9,000 928 898 928 898 11,950 12,000 1,378 1,198 1,378 1,199
6,000 9,000 12,000
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 9,000 9,050 935 903 935 903 12,000 12,050 1,385 1,203 1,385 1,206
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 9,050 9,100 943 908 943 908 12,050 12,100 1,393 1,208 1,393 1,214
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 9,100 9,150 950 913 950 913 12,100 12,150 1,400 1,213 1,400 1,221
6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 9,150 9,200 958 918 958 918 12,150 12,200 1,408 1,218 1,408 1,229
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 9,200 9,250 965 923 965 923 12,200 12,250 1,415 1,223 1,415 1,236
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 9,250 9,300 973 928 973 928 12,250 12,300 1,423 1,228 1,423 1,244
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 9,300 9,350 980 933 980 933 12,300 12,350 1,430 1,233 1,430 1,251
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 9,350 9,400 988 938 988 938 12,350 12,400 1,438 1,238 1,438 1,259
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 9,400 9,450 995 943 995 943 12,400 12,450 1,445 1,243 1,445 1,266
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 9,450 9,500 1,003 948 1,003 948 12,450 12,500 1,453 1,248 1,453 1,274
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 9,500 9,550 1,010 953 1,010 953 12,500 12,550 1,460 1,253 1,460 1,281
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 9,550 9,600 1,018 958 1,018 958 12,550 12,600 1,468 1,258 1,468 1,289
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 9,600 9,650 1,025 963 1,025 963 12,600 12,650 1,475 1,263 1,475 1,296
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 9,650 9,700 1,033 968 1,033 968 12,650 12,700 1,483 1,268 1,483 1,304
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 9,700 9,750 1,040 973 1,040 973 12,700 12,750 1,490 1,273 1,490 1,311
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 9,750 9,800 1,048 978 1,048 978 12,750 12,800 1,498 1,278 1,498 1,319
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 9,800 9,850 1,055 983 1,055 983 12,800 12,850 1,505 1,283 1,505 1,326
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 9,850 9,900 1,063 988 1,063 988 12,850 12,900 1,513 1,288 1,513 1,334
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 9,900 9,950 1,070 993 1,070 993 12,900 12,950 1,520 1,293 1,520 1,341
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 9,950 10,000 1,078 998 1,078 998 12,950 13,000 1,528 1,298 1,528 1,349
7,000 10,000 13,000
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 10,000 10,050 1,085 1,003 1,085 1,003 13,000 13,050 1,535 1,303 1,535 1,356
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 10,050 10,100 1,093 1,008 1,093 1,008 13,050 13,100 1,543 1,308 1,543 1,364
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 10,100 10,150 1,100 1,013 1,100 1,013 13,100 13,150 1,550 1,313 1,550 1,371
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 10,150 10,200 1,108 1,018 1,108 1,018 13,150 13,200 1,558 1,318 1,558 1,379
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 10,200 10,250 1,115 1,023 1,115 1,023 13,200 13,250 1,565 1,323 1,565 1,386
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 10,250 10,300 1,123 1,028 1,123 1,028 13,250 13,300 1,573 1,328 1,573 1,394
7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 10,300 10,350 1,130 1,033 1,130 1,033 13,300 13,350 1,580 1,333 1,580 1,401
7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 10,350 10,400 1,138 1,038 1,138 1,038 13,350 13,400 1,588 1,338 1,588 1,409
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 10,400 10,450 1,145 1,043 1,145 1,043 13,400 13,450 1,595 1,343 1,595 1,416
7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 10,450 10,500 1,153 1,048 1,153 1,048 13,450 13,500 1,603 1,348 1,603 1,424
7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 10,500 10,550 1,160 1,053 1,160 1,053 13,500 13,550 1,610 1,353 1,610 1,431
7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758 10,550 10,600 1,168 1,058 1,168 1,058 13,550 13,600 1,618 1,358 1,618 1,439
7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763 10,600 10,650 1,175 1,063 1,175 1,063 13,600 13,650 1,625 1,363 1,625 1,446
7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768 10,650 10,700 1,183 1,068 1,183 1,068 13,650 13,700 1,633 1,368 1,633 1,454
7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773 10,700 10,750 1,190 1,073 1,190 1,073 13,700 13,750 1,640 1,373 1,640 1,461
7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778 10,750 10,800 1,198 1,078 1,198 1,078 13,750 13,800 1,648 1,378 1,648 1,469
7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783 10,800 10,850 1,205 1,083 1,205 1,083 13,800 13,850 1,655 1,383 1,655 1,476
7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788 10,850 10,900 1,213 1,088 1,213 1,088 13,850 13,900 1,663 1,388 1,663 1,484
7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793 10,900 10,950 1,220 1,093 1,220 1,093 13,900 13,950 1,670 1,393 1,670 1,491
7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798 10,950 11,000 1,228 1,098 1,228 1,098 13,950 14,000 1,678 1,398 1,678 1,499
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 255 -

Page 258 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
14,000 17,000 20,000
14,000 14,050 1,685 1,403 1,685 1,506 17,000 17,050 2,135 1,716 2,135 1,956 20,000 20,050 2,585 2,166 2,585 2,406
14,050 14,100 1,693 1,408 1,693 1,514 17,050 17,100 2,143 1,724 2,143 1,964 20,050 20,100 2,593 2,174 2,593 2,414
14,100 14,150 1,700 1,413 1,700 1,521 17,100 17,150 2,150 1,731 2,150 1,971 20,100 20,150 2,600 2,181 2,600 2,421
14,150 14,200 1,708 1,418 1,708 1,529 17,150 17,200 2,158 1,739 2,158 1,979 20,150 20,200 2,608 2,189 2,608 2,429
14,200 14,250 1,715 1,423 1,715 1,536 17,200 17,250 2,165 1,746 2,165 1,986 20,200 20,250 2,615 2,196 2,615 2,436
14,250 14,300 1,723 1,428 1,723 1,544 17,250 17,300 2,173 1,754 2,173 1,994 20,250 20,300 2,623 2,204 2,623 2,444
14,300 14,350 1,730 1,433 1,730 1,551 17,300 17,350 2,180 1,761 2,180 2,001 20,300 20,350 2,630 2,211 2,630 2,451
14,350 14,400 1,738 1,438 1,738 1,559 17,350 17,400 2,188 1,769 2,188 2,009 20,350 20,400 2,638 2,219 2,638 2,459
14,400 14,450 1,745 1,443 1,745 1,566 17,400 17,450 2,195 1,776 2,195 2,016 20,400 20,450 2,645 2,226 2,645 2,466
14,450 14,500 1,753 1,448 1,753 1,574 17,450 17,500 2,203 1,784 2,203 2,024 20,450 20,500 2,653 2,234 2,653 2,474
14,500 14,550 1,760 1,453 1,760 1,581 17,500 17,550 2,210 1,791 2,210 2,031 20,500 20,550 2,660 2,241 2,660 2,481
14,550 14,600 1,768 1,458 1,768 1,589 17,550 17,600 2,218 1,799 2,218 2,039 20,550 20,600 2,668 2,249 2,668 2,489
14,600 14,650 1,775 1,463 1,775 1,596 17,600 17,650 2,225 1,806 2,225 2,046 20,600 20,650 2,675 2,256 2,675 2,496
14,650 14,700 1,783 1,468 1,783 1,604 17,650 17,700 2,233 1,814 2,233 2,054 20,650 20,700 2,683 2,264 2,683 2,504
14,700 14,750 1,790 1,473 1,790 1,611 17,700 17,750 2,240 1,821 2,240 2,061 20,700 20,750 2,690 2,271 2,690 2,511
14,750 14,800 1,798 1,478 1,798 1,619 17,750 17,800 2,248 1,829 2,248 2,069 20,750 20,800 2,698 2,279 2,698 2,519
14,800 14,850 1,805 1,483 1,805 1,626 17,800 17,850 2,255 1,836 2,255 2,076 20,800 20,850 2,705 2,286 2,705 2,526
14,850 14,900 1,813 1,488 1,813 1,634 17,850 17,900 2,263 1,844 2,263 2,084 20,850 20,900 2,713 2,294 2,713 2,534
14,900 14,950 1,820 1,493 1,820 1,641 17,900 17,950 2,270 1,851 2,270 2,091 20,900 20,950 2,720 2,301 2,720 2,541
14,950 15,000 1,828 1,498 1,828 1,649 17,950 18,000 2,278 1,859 2,278 2,099 20,950 21,000 2,728 2,309 2,728 2,549
15,000 18,000 21,000
15,000 15,050 1,835 1,503 1,835 1,656 18,000 18,050 2,285 1,866 2,285 2,106 21,000 21,050 2,735 2,316 2,735 2,556
15,050 15,100 1,843 1,508 1,843 1,664 18,050 18,100 2,293 1,874 2,293 2,114 21,050 21,100 2,743 2,324 2,743 2,564
15,100 15,150 1,850 1,513 1,850 1,671 18,100 18,150 2,300 1,881 2,300 2,121 21,100 21,150 2,750 2,331 2,750 2,571
15,150 15,200 1,858 1,518 1,858 1,679 18,150 18,200 2,308 1,889 2,308 2,129 21,150 21,200 2,758 2,339 2,758 2,579
15,200 15,250 1,865 1,523 1,865 1,686 18,200 18,250 2,315 1,896 2,315 2,136 21,200 21,250 2,765 2,346 2,765 2,586
15,250 15,300 1,873 1,528 1,873 1,694 18,250 18,300 2,323 1,904 2,323 2,144 21,250 21,300 2,773 2,354 2,773 2,594
15,300 15,350 1,880 1,533 1,880 1,701 18,300 18,350 2,330 1,911 2,330 2,151 21,300 21,350 2,780 2,361 2,780 2,601
15,350 15,400 1,888 1,538 1,888 1,709 18,350 18,400 2,338 1,919 2,338 2,159 21,350 21,400 2,788 2,369 2,788 2,609
15,400 15,450 1,895 1,543 1,895 1,716 18,400 18,450 2,345 1,926 2,345 2,166 21,400 21,450 2,795 2,376 2,795 2,616
15,450 15,500 1,903 1,548 1,903 1,724 18,450 18,500 2,353 1,934 2,353 2,174 21,450 21,500 2,803 2,384 2,803 2,624
15,500 15,550 1,910 1,553 1,910 1,731 18,500 18,550 2,360 1,941 2,360 2,181 21,500 21,550 2,810 2,391 2,810 2,631
15,550 15,600 1,918 1,558 1,918 1,739 18,550 18,600 2,368 1,949 2,368 2,189 21,550 21,600 2,818 2,399 2,818 2,639
15,600 15,650 1,925 1,563 1,925 1,746 18,600 18,650 2,375 1,956 2,375 2,196 21,600 21,650 2,825 2,406 2,825 2,646
15,650 15,700 1,933 1,568 1,933 1,754 18,650 18,700 2,383 1,964 2,383 2,204 21,650 21,700 2,833 2,414 2,833 2,654
15,700 15,750 1,940 1,573 1,940 1,761 18,700 18,750 2,390 1,971 2,390 2,211 21,700 21,750 2,840 2,421 2,840 2,661
15,750 15,800 1,948 1,578 1,948 1,769 18,750 18,800 2,398 1,979 2,398 2,219 21,750 21,800 2,848 2,429 2,848 2,669
15,800 15,850 1,955 1,583 1,955 1,776 18,800 18,850 2,405 1,986 2,405 2,226 21,800 21,850 2,855 2,436 2,855 2,676
15,850 15,900 1,963 1,588 1,963 1,784 18,850 18,900 2,413 1,994 2,413 2,234 21,850 21,900 2,863 2,444 2,863 2,684
15,900 15,950 1,970 1,593 1,970 1,791 18,900 18,950 2,420 2,001 2,420 2,241 21,900 21,950 2,870 2,451 2,870 2,691
15,950 16,000 1,978 1,598 1,978 1,799 18,950 19,000 2,428 2,009 2,428 2,249 21,950 22,000 2,878 2,459 2,878 2,699
16,000 19,000 22,000
16,000 16,050 1,985 1,603 1,985 1,806 19,000 19,050 2,435 2,016 2,435 2,256 22,000 22,050 2,885 2,466 2,885 2,706
16,050 16,100 1,993 1,608 1,993 1,814 19,050 19,100 2,443 2,024 2,443 2,264 22,050 22,100 2,893 2,474 2,893 2,714
16,100 16,150 2,000 1,613 2,000 1,821 19,100 19,150 2,450 2,031 2,450 2,271 22,100 22,150 2,900 2,481 2,900 2,721
16,150 16,200 2,008 1,618 2,008 1,829 19,150 19,200 2,458 2,039 2,458 2,279 22,150 22,200 2,908 2,489 2,908 2,729
16,200 16,250 2,015 1,623 2,015 1,836 19,200 19,250 2,465 2,046 2,465 2,286 22,200 22,250 2,915 2,496 2,915 2,736
16,250 16,300 2,023 1,628 2,023 1,844 19,250 19,300 2,473 2,054 2,473 2,294 22,250 22,300 2,923 2,504 2,923 2,744
16,300 16,350 2,030 1,633 2,030 1,851 19,300 19,350 2,480 2,061 2,480 2,301 22,300 22,350 2,930 2,511 2,930 2,751
16,350 16,400 2,038 1,638 2,038 1,859 19,350 19,400 2,488 2,069 2,488 2,309 22,350 22,400 2,938 2,519 2,938 2,759
16,400 16,450 2,045 1,643 2,045 1,866 19,400 19,450 2,495 2,076 2,495 2,316 22,400 22,450 2,945 2,526 2,945 2,766
16,450 16,500 2,053 1,648 2,053 1,874 19,450 19,500 2,503 2,084 2,503 2,324 22,450 22,500 2,953 2,534 2,953 2,774
16,500 16,550 2,060 1,653 2,060 1,881 19,500 19,550 2,510 2,091 2,510 2,331 22,500 22,550 2,960 2,541 2,960 2,781
16,550 16,600 2,068 1,658 2,068 1,889 19,550 19,600 2,518 2,099 2,518 2,339 22,550 22,600 2,968 2,549 2,968 2,789
16,600 16,650 2,075 1,663 2,075 1,896 19,600 19,650 2,525 2,106 2,525 2,346 22,600 22,650 2,975 2,556 2,975 2,796
16,650 16,700 2,083 1,668 2,083 1,904 19,650 19,700 2,533 2,114 2,533 2,354 22,650 22,700 2,983 2,564 2,983 2,804
16,700 16,750 2,090 1,673 2,090 1,911 19,700 19,750 2,540 2,121 2,540 2,361 22,700 22,750 2,990 2,571 2,990 2,811
16,750 16,800 2,098 1,679 2,098 1,919 19,750 19,800 2,548 2,129 2,548 2,369 22,750 22,800 2,998 2,579 2,998 2,819
16,800 16,850 2,105 1,686 2,105 1,926 19,800 19,850 2,555 2,136 2,555 2,376 22,800 22,850 3,005 2,586 3,005 2,826
16,850 16,900 2,113 1,694 2,113 1,934 19,850 19,900 2,563 2,144 2,563 2,384 22,850 22,900 3,013 2,594 3,013 2,834
16,900 16,950 2,120 1,701 2,120 1,941 19,900 19,950 2,570 2,151 2,570 2,391 22,900 22,950 3,020 2,601 3,020 2,841
16,950 17,000 2,128 1,709 2,128 1,949 19,950 20,000 2,578 2,159 2,578 2,399 22,950 23,000 3,028 2,609 3,028 2,849
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 256 -

Page 259 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
23,000 26,000 29,000
23,000 23,050 3,035 2,616 3,035 2,856 26,000 26,050 3,485 3,066 3,485 3,306 29,000 29,050 3,935 3,516 3,935 3,756
23,050 23,100 3,043 2,624 3,043 2,864 26,050 26,100 3,493 3,074 3,493 3,314 29,050 29,100 3,943 3,524 3,943 3,764
23,100 23,150 3,050 2,631 3,050 2,871 26,100 26,150 3,500 3,081 3,500 3,321 29,100 29,150 3,950 3,531 3,950 3,771
23,150 23,200 3,058 2,639 3,058 2,879 26,150 26,200 3,508 3,089 3,508 3,329 29,150 29,200 3,958 3,539 3,958 3,779
23,200 23,250 3,065 2,646 3,065 2,886 26,200 26,250 3,515 3,096 3,515 3,336 29,200 29,250 3,965 3,546 3,965 3,786
23,250 23,300 3,073 2,654 3,073 2,894 26,250 26,300 3,523 3,104 3,523 3,344 29,250 29,300 3,973 3,554 3,973 3,794
23,300 23,350 3,080 2,661 3,080 2,901 26,300 26,350 3,530 3,111 3,530 3,351 29,300 29,350 3,980 3,561 3,980 3,801
23,350 23,400 3,088 2,669 3,088 2,909 26,350 26,400 3,538 3,119 3,538 3,359 29,350 29,400 3,988 3,569 3,988 3,809
23,400 23,450 3,095 2,676 3,095 2,916 26,400 26,450 3,545 3,126 3,545 3,366 29,400 29,450 3,995 3,576 3,995 3,816
23,450 23,500 3,103 2,684 3,103 2,924 26,450 26,500 3,553 3,134 3,553 3,374 29,450 29,500 4,003 3,584 4,003 3,824
23,500 23,550 3,110 2,691 3,110 2,931 26,500 26,550 3,560 3,141 3,560 3,381 29,500 29,550 4,010 3,591 4,010 3,831
23,550 23,600 3,118 2,699 3,118 2,939 26,550 26,600 3,568 3,149 3,568 3,389 29,550 29,600 4,018 3,599 4,018 3,839
23,600 23,650 3,125 2,706 3,125 2,946 26,600 26,650 3,575 3,156 3,575 3,396 29,600 29,650 4,025 3,606 4,025 3,846
23,650 23,700 3,133 2,714 3,133 2,954 26,650 26,700 3,583 3,164 3,583 3,404 29,650 29,700 4,033 3,614 4,033 3,854
23,700 23,750 3,140 2,721 3,140 2,961 26,700 26,750 3,590 3,171 3,590 3,411 29,700 29,750 4,040 3,621 4,040 3,861
23,750 23,800 3,148 2,729 3,148 2,969 26,750 26,800 3,598 3,179 3,598 3,419 29,750 29,800 4,048 3,629 4,048 3,869
23,800 23,850 3,155 2,736 3,155 2,976 26,800 26,850 3,605 3,186 3,605 3,426 29,800 29,850 4,055 3,636 4,055 3,876
23,850 23,900 3,163 2,744 3,163 2,984 26,850 26,900 3,613 3,194 3,613 3,434 29,850 29,900 4,063 3,644 4,063 3,884
23,900 23,950 3,170 2,751 3,170 2,991 26,900 26,950 3,620 3,201 3,620 3,441 29,900 29,950 4,070 3,651 4,070 3,891
23,950 24,000 3,178 2,759 3,178 2,999 26,950 27,000 3,628 3,209 3,628 3,449 29,950 30,000 4,078 3,659 4,078 3,899
24,000 27,000 30,000
24,000 24,050 3,185 2,766 3,185 3,006 27,000 27,050 3,635 3,216 3,635 3,456 30,000 30,050 4,085 3,666 4,085 3,906
24,050 24,100 3,193 2,774 3,193 3,014 27,050 27,100 3,643 3,224 3,643 3,464 30,050 30,100 4,093 3,674 4,093 3,914
24,100 24,150 3,200 2,781 3,200 3,021 27,100 27,150 3,650 3,231 3,650 3,471 30,100 30,150 4,100 3,681 4,100 3,921
24,150 24,200 3,208 2,789 3,208 3,029 27,150 27,200 3,658 3,239 3,658 3,479 30,150 30,200 4,108 3,689 4,108 3,929
24,200 24,250 3,215 2,796 3,215 3,036 27,200 27,250 3,665 3,246 3,665 3,486 30,200 30,250 4,115 3,696 4,115 3,936
24,250 24,300 3,223 2,804 3,223 3,044 27,250 27,300 3,673 3,254 3,673 3,494 30,250 30,300 4,123 3,704 4,123 3,944
24,300 24,350 3,230 2,811 3,230 3,051 27,300 27,350 3,680 3,261 3,680 3,501 30,300 30,350 4,130 3,711 4,130 3,951
24,350 24,400 3,238 2,819 3,238 3,059 27,350 27,400 3,688 3,269 3,688 3,509 30,350 30,400 4,138 3,719 4,138 3,959
24,400 24,450 3,245 2,826 3,245 3,066 27,400 27,450 3,695 3,276 3,695 3,516 30,400 30,450 4,145 3,726 4,145 3,966
24,450 24,500 3,253 2,834 3,253 3,074 27,450 27,500 3,703 3,284 3,703 3,524 30,450 30,500 4,153 3,734 4,153 3,974
24,500 24,550 3,260 2,841 3,260 3,081 27,500 27,550 3,710 3,291 3,710 3,531 30,500 30,550 4,160 3,741 4,160 3,981
24,550 24,600 3,268 2,849 3,268 3,089 27,550 27,600 3,718 3,299 3,718 3,539 30,550 30,600 4,168 3,749 4,168 3,989
24,600 24,650 3,275 2,856 3,275 3,096 27,600 27,650 3,725 3,306 3,725 3,546 30,600 30,650 4,175 3,756 4,175 3,996
24,650 24,700 3,283 2,864 3,283 3,104 27,650 27,700 3,733 3,314 3,733 3,554 30,650 30,700 4,183 3,764 4,183 4,004
24,700 24,750 3,290 2,871 3,290 3,111 27,700 27,750 3,740 3,321 3,740 3,561 30,700 30,750 4,190 3,771 4,190 4,011
24,750 24,800 3,298 2,879 3,298 3,119 27,750 27,800 3,748 3,329 3,748 3,569 30,750 30,800 4,198 3,779 4,198 4,019
24,800 24,850 3,305 2,886 3,305 3,126 27,800 27,850 3,755 3,336 3,755 3,576 30,800 30,850 4,205 3,786 4,205 4,026
24,850 24,900 3,313 2,894 3,313 3,134 27,850 27,900 3,763 3,344 3,763 3,584 30,850 30,900 4,213 3,794 4,213 4,034
24,900 24,950 3,320 2,901 3,320 3,141 27,900 27,950 3,770 3,351 3,770 3,591 30,900 30,950 4,220 3,801 4,220 4,041
24,950 25,000 3,328 2,909 3,328 3,149 27,950 28,000 3,778 3,359 3,778 3,599 30,950 31,000 4,228 3,809 4,228 4,049
25,000 28,000 31,000
25,000 25,050 3,335 2,916 3,335 3,156 28,000 28,050 3,785 3,366 3,785 3,606 31,000 31,050 4,235 3,816 4,235 4,056
25,050 25,100 3,343 2,924 3,343 3,164 28,050 28,100 3,793 3,374 3,793 3,614 31,050 31,100 4,243 3,824 4,243 4,064
25,100 25,150 3,350 2,931 3,350 3,171 28,100 28,150 3,800 3,381 3,800 3,621 31,100 31,150 4,250 3,831 4,250 4,071
25,150 25,200 3,358 2,939 3,358 3,179 28,150 28,200 3,808 3,389 3,808 3,629 31,150 31,200 4,258 3,839 4,258 4,079
25,200 25,250 3,365 2,946 3,365 3,186 28,200 28,250 3,815 3,396 3,815 3,636 31,200 31,250 4,265 3,846 4,265 4,086
25,250 25,300 3,373 2,954 3,373 3,194 28,250 28,300 3,823 3,404 3,823 3,644 31,250 31,300 4,273 3,854 4,273 4,094
25,300 25,350 3,380 2,961 3,380 3,201 28,300 28,350 3,830 3,411 3,830 3,651 31,300 31,350 4,280 3,861 4,280 4,101
25,350 25,400 3,388 2,969 3,388 3,209 28,350 28,400 3,838 3,419 3,838 3,659 31,350 31,400 4,288 3,869 4,288 4,109
25,400 25,450 3,395 2,976 3,395 3,216 28,400 28,450 3,845 3,426 3,845 3,666 31,400 31,450 4,295 3,876 4,295 4,116
25,450 25,500 3,403 2,984 3,403 3,224 28,450 28,500 3,853 3,434 3,853 3,674 31,450 31,500 4,303 3,884 4,303 4,124
25,500 25,550 3,410 2,991 3,410 3,231 28,500 28,550 3,860 3,441 3,860 3,681 31,500 31,550 4,310 3,891 4,310 4,131
25,550 25,600 3,418 2,999 3,418 3,239 28,550 28,600 3,868 3,449 3,868 3,689 31,550 31,600 4,318 3,899 4,318 4,139
25,600 25,650 3,425 3,006 3,425 3,246 28,600 28,650 3,875 3,456 3,875 3,696 31,600 31,650 4,325 3,906 4,325 4,146
25,650 25,700 3,433 3,014 3,433 3,254 28,650 28,700 3,883 3,464 3,883 3,704 31,650 31,700 4,333 3,914 4,333 4,154
25,700 25,750 3,440 3,021 3,440 3,261 28,700 28,750 3,890 3,471 3,890 3,711 31,700 31,750 4,340 3,921 4,340 4,161
25,750 25,800 3,448 3,029 3,448 3,269 28,750 28,800 3,898 3,479 3,898 3,719 31,750 31,800 4,348 3,929 4,348 4,169
25,800 25,850 3,455 3,036 3,455 3,276 28,800 28,850 3,905 3,486 3,905 3,726 31,800 31,850 4,355 3,936 4,355 4,176
25,850 25,900 3,463 3,044 3,463 3,284 28,850 28,900 3,913 3,494 3,913 3,734 31,850 31,900 4,363 3,944 4,363 4,184
25,900 25,950 3,470 3,051 3,470 3,291 28,900 28,950 3,920 3,501 3,920 3,741 31,900 31,950 4,370 3,951 4,370 4,191
25,950 26,000 3,478 3,059 3,478 3,299 28,950 29,000 3,928 3,509 3,928 3,749 31,950 32,000 4,378 3,959 4,378 4,199
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 257 -

Page 260 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
32,000 35,000 38,000
32,000 32,050 4,385 3,966 4,385 4,206 35,000 35,050 4,938 4,416 4,938 4,656 38,000 38,050 5,688 4,866 5,688 5,106
32,050 32,100 4,393 3,974 4,393 4,214 35,050 35,100 4,950 4,424 4,950 4,664 38,050 38,100 5,700 4,874 5,700 5,114
32,100 32,150 4,400 3,981 4,400 4,221 35,100 35,150 4,963 4,431 4,963 4,671 38,100 38,150 5,713 4,881 5,713 5,121
32,150 32,200 4,408 3,989 4,408 4,229 35,150 35,200 4,975 4,439 4,975 4,679 38,150 38,200 5,725 4,889 5,725 5,129
32,200 32,250 4,415 3,996 4,415 4,236 35,200 35,250 4,988 4,446 4,988 4,686 38,200 38,250 5,738 4,896 5,738 5,136
32,250 32,300 4,423 4,004 4,423 4,244 35,250 35,300 5,000 4,454 5,000 4,694 38,250 38,300 5,750 4,904 5,750 5,144
32,300 32,350 4,430 4,011 4,430 4,251 35,300 35,350 5,013 4,461 5,013 4,701 38,300 38,350 5,763 4,911 5,763 5,151
32,350 32,400 4,438 4,019 4,438 4,259 35,350 35,400 5,025 4,469 5,025 4,709 38,350 38,400 5,775 4,919 5,775 5,159
32,400 32,450 4,445 4,026 4,445 4,266 35,400 35,450 5,038 4,476 5,038 4,716 38,400 38,450 5,788 4,926 5,788 5,166
32,450 32,500 4,453 4,034 4,453 4,274 35,450 35,500 5,050 4,484 5,050 4,724 38,450 38,500 5,800 4,934 5,800 5,174
32,500 32,550 4,460 4,041 4,460 4,281 35,500 35,550 5,063 4,491 5,063 4,731 38,500 38,550 5,813 4,941 5,813 5,181
32,550 32,600 4,468 4,049 4,468 4,289 35,550 35,600 5,075 4,499 5,075 4,739 38,550 38,600 5,825 4,949 5,825 5,189
32,600 32,650 4,475 4,056 4,475 4,296 35,600 35,650 5,088 4,506 5,088 4,746 38,600 38,650 5,838 4,956 5,838 5,196
32,650 32,700 4,483 4,064 4,483 4,304 35,650 35,700 5,100 4,514 5,100 4,754 38,650 38,700 5,850 4,964 5,850 5,204
32,700 32,750 4,490 4,071 4,490 4,311 35,700 35,750 5,113 4,521 5,113 4,761 38,700 38,750 5,863 4,971 5,863 5,211
32,750 32,800 4,498 4,079 4,498 4,319 35,750 35,800 5,125 4,529 5,125 4,769 38,750 38,800 5,875 4,979 5,875 5,219
32,800 32,850 4,505 4,086 4,505 4,326 35,800 35,850 5,138 4,536 5,138 4,776 38,800 38,850 5,888 4,986 5,888 5,226
32,850 32,900 4,513 4,094 4,513 4,334 35,850 35,900 5,150 4,544 5,150 4,784 38,850 38,900 5,900 4,994 5,900 5,234
32,900 32,950 4,520 4,101 4,520 4,341 35,900 35,950 5,163 4,551 5,163 4,791 38,900 38,950 5,913 5,001 5,913 5,241
32,950 33,000 4,528 4,109 4,528 4,349 35,950 36,000 5,175 4,559 5,175 4,799 38,950 39,000 5,925 5,009 5,925 5,249
33,000 36,000 39,000
33,000 33,050 4,535 4,116 4,535 4,356 36,000 36,050 5,188 4,566 5,188 4,806 39,000 39,050 5,938 5,016 5,938 5,256
33,050 33,100 4,543 4,124 4,543 4,364 36,050 36,100 5,200 4,574 5,200 4,814 39,050 39,100 5,950 5,024 5,950 5,264
33,100 33,150 4,550 4,131 4,550 4,371 36,100 36,150 5,213 4,581 5,213 4,821 39,100 39,150 5,963 5,031 5,963 5,271
33,150 33,200 4,558 4,139 4,558 4,379 36,150 36,200 5,225 4,589 5,225 4,829 39,150 39,200 5,975 5,039 5,975 5,279
33,200 33,250 4,565 4,146 4,565 4,386 36,200 36,250 5,238 4,596 5,238 4,836 39,200 39,250 5,988 5,046 5,988 5,286
33,250 33,300 4,573 4,154 4,573 4,394 36,250 36,300 5,250 4,604 5,250 4,844 39,250 39,300 6,000 5,054 6,000 5,294
33,300 33,350 4,580 4,161 4,580 4,401 36,300 36,350 5,263 4,611 5,263 4,851 39,300 39,350 6,013 5,061 6,013 5,301
33,350 33,400 4,588 4,169 4,588 4,409 36,350 36,400 5,275 4,619 5,275 4,859 39,350 39,400 6,025 5,069 6,025 5,309
33,400 33,450 4,595 4,176 4,595 4,416 36,400 36,450 5,288 4,626 5,288 4,866 39,400 39,450 6,038 5,076 6,038 5,316
33,450 33,500 4,603 4,184 4,603 4,424 36,450 36,500 5,300 4,634 5,300 4,874 39,450 39,500 6,050 5,084 6,050 5,324
33,500 33,550 4,610 4,191 4,610 4,431 36,500 36,550 5,313 4,641 5,313 4,881 39,500 39,550 6,063 5,091 6,063 5,331
33,550 33,600 4,618 4,199 4,618 4,439 36,550 36,600 5,325 4,649 5,325 4,889 39,550 39,600 6,075 5,099 6,075 5,339
33,600 33,650 4,625 4,206 4,625 4,446 36,600 36,650 5,338 4,656 5,338 4,896 39,600 39,650 6,088 5,106 6,088 5,346
33,650 33,700 4,633 4,214 4,633 4,454 36,650 36,700 5,350 4,664 5,350 4,904 39,650 39,700 6,100 5,114 6,100 5,354
33,700 33,750 4,640 4,221 4,640 4,461 36,700 36,750 5,363 4,671 5,363 4,911 39,700 39,750 6,113 5,121 6,113 5,361
33,750 33,800 4,648 4,229 4,648 4,469 36,750 36,800 5,375 4,679 5,375 4,919 39,750 39,800 6,125 5,129 6,125 5,369
33,800 33,850 4,655 4,236 4,655 4,476 36,800 36,850 5,388 4,686 5,388 4,926 39,800 39,850 6,138 5,136 6,138 5,376
33,850 33,900 4,663 4,244 4,663 4,484 36,850 36,900 5,400 4,694 5,400 4,934 39,850 39,900 6,150 5,144 6,150 5,384
33,900 33,950 4,670 4,251 4,670 4,491 36,900 36,950 5,413 4,701 5,413 4,941 39,900 39,950 6,163 5,151 6,163 5,391
33,950 34,000 4,678 4,259 4,678 4,499 36,950 37,000 5,425 4,709 5,425 4,949 39,950 40,000 6,175 5,159 6,175 5,399
34,000 37,000 40,000
34,000 34,050 4,688 4,266 4,688 4,506 37,000 37,050 5,438 4,716 5,438 4,956 40,000 40,050 6,188 5,166 6,188 5,406
34,050 34,100 4,700 4,274 4,700 4,514 37,050 37,100 5,450 4,724 5,450 4,964 40,050 40,100 6,200 5,174 6,200 5,414
34,100 34,150 4,713 4,281 4,713 4,521 37,100 37,150 5,463 4,731 5,463 4,971 40,100 40,150 6,213 5,181 6,213 5,421
34,150 34,200 4,725 4,289 4,725 4,529 37,150 37,200 5,475 4,739 5,475 4,979 40,150 40,200 6,225 5,189 6,225 5,429
34,200 34,250 4,738 4,296 4,738 4,536 37,200 37,250 5,488 4,746 5,488 4,986 40,200 40,250 6,238 5,196 6,238 5,436
34,250 34,300 4,750 4,304 4,750 4,544 37,250 37,300 5,500 4,754 5,500 4,994 40,250 40,300 6,250 5,204 6,250 5,444
34,300 34,350 4,763 4,311 4,763 4,551 37,300 37,350 5,513 4,761 5,513 5,001 40,300 40,350 6,263 5,211 6,263 5,451
34,350 34,400 4,775 4,319 4,775 4,559 37,350 37,400 5,525 4,769 5,525 5,009 40,350 40,400 6,275 5,219 6,275 5,459
34,400 34,450 4,788 4,326 4,788 4,566 37,400 37,450 5,538 4,776 5,538 5,016 40,400 40,450 6,288 5,226 6,288 5,466
34,450 34,500 4,800 4,334 4,800 4,574 37,450 37,500 5,550 4,784 5,550 5,024 40,450 40,500 6,300 5,234 6,300 5,474
34,500 34,550 4,813 4,341 4,813 4,581 37,500 37,550 5,563 4,791 5,563 5,031 40,500 40,550 6,313 5,241 6,313 5,481
34,550 34,600 4,825 4,349 4,825 4,589 37,550 37,600 5,575 4,799 5,575 5,039 40,550 40,600 6,325 5,249 6,325 5,489
34,600 34,650 4,838 4,356 4,838 4,596 37,600 37,650 5,588 4,806 5,588 5,046 40,600 40,650 6,338 5,256 6,338 5,496
34,650 34,700 4,850 4,364 4,850 4,604 37,650 37,700 5,600 4,814 5,600 5,054 40,650 40,700 6,350 5,264 6,350 5,504
34,700 34,750 4,863 4,371 4,863 4,611 37,700 37,750 5,613 4,821 5,613 5,061 40,700 40,750 6,363 5,271 6,363 5,511
34,750 34,800 4,875 4,379 4,875 4,619 37,750 37,800 5,625 4,829 5,625 5,069 40,750 40,800 6,375 5,279 6,375 5,519
34,800 34,850 4,888 4,386 4,888 4,626 37,800 37,850 5,638 4,836 5,638 5,076 40,800 40,850 6,388 5,286 6,388 5,526
34,850 34,900 4,900 4,394 4,900 4,634 37,850 37,900 5,650 4,844 5,650 5,084 40,850 40,900 6,400 5,294 6,400 5,534
34,900 34,950 4,913 4,401 4,913 4,641 37,900 37,950 5,663 4,851 5,663 5,091 40,900 40,950 6,413 5,301 6,413 5,541
34,950 35,000 4,925 4,409 4,925 4,649 37,950 38,000 5,675 4,859 5,675 5,099 40,950 41,000 6,425 5,309 6,425 5,549
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 258 -

Page 261 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
41,000 44,000 47,000
41,000 41,050 6,438 5,316 6,438 5,556 44,000 44,050 7,188 5,766 7,188 6,006 47,000 47,050 7,938 6,216 7,938 6,604
41,050 41,100 6,450 5,324 6,450 5,564 44,050 44,100 7,200 5,774 7,200 6,014 47,050 47,100 7,950 6,224 7,950 6,616
41,100 41,150 6,463 5,331 6,463 5,571 44,100 44,150 7,213 5,781 7,213 6,021 47,100 47,150 7,963 6,231 7,963 6,629
41,150 41,200 6,475 5,339 6,475 5,579 44,150 44,200 7,225 5,789 7,225 6,029 47,150 47,200 7,975 6,239 7,975 6,641
41,200 41,250 6,488 5,346 6,488 5,586 44,200 44,250 7,238 5,796 7,238 6,036 47,200 47,250 7,988 6,246 7,988 6,654
41,250 41,300 6,500 5,354 6,500 5,594 44,250 44,300 7,250 5,804 7,250 6,044 47,250 47,300 8,000 6,254 8,000 6,666
41,300 41,350 6,513 5,361 6,513 5,601 44,300 44,350 7,263 5,811 7,263 6,051 47,300 47,350 8,013 6,261 8,013 6,679
41,350 41,400 6,525 5,369 6,525 5,609 44,350 44,400 7,275 5,819 7,275 6,059 47,350 47,400 8,025 6,269 8,025 6,691
41,400 41,450 6,538 5,376 6,538 5,616 44,400 44,450 7,288 5,826 7,288 6,066 47,400 47,450 8,038 6,276 8,038 6,704
41,450 41,500 6,550 5,384 6,550 5,624 44,450 44,500 7,300 5,834 7,300 6,074 47,450 47,500 8,050 6,284 8,050 6,716
41,500 41,550 6,563 5,391 6,563 5,631 44,500 44,550 7,313 5,841 7,313 6,081 47,500 47,550 8,063 6,291 8,063 6,729
41,550 41,600 6,575 5,399 6,575 5,639 44,550 44,600 7,325 5,849 7,325 6,089 47,550 47,600 8,075 6,299 8,075 6,741
41,600 41,650 6,588 5,406 6,588 5,646 44,600 44,650 7,338 5,856 7,338 6,096 47,600 47,650 8,088 6,306 8,088 6,754
41,650 41,700 6,600 5,414 6,600 5,654 44,650 44,700 7,350 5,864 7,350 6,104 47,650 47,700 8,100 6,314 8,100 6,766
41,700 41,750 6,613 5,421 6,613 5,661 44,700 44,750 7,363 5,871 7,363 6,111 47,700 47,750 8,113 6,321 8,113 6,779
41,750 41,800 6,625 5,429 6,625 5,669 44,750 44,800 7,375 5,879 7,375 6,119 47,750 47,800 8,125 6,329 8,125 6,791
41,800 41,850 6,638 5,436 6,638 5,676 44,800 44,850 7,388 5,886 7,388 6,126 47,800 47,850 8,138 6,336 8,138 6,804
41,850 41,900 6,650 5,444 6,650 5,684 44,850 44,900 7,400 5,894 7,400 6,134 47,850 47,900 8,150 6,344 8,150 6,816
41,900 41,950 6,663 5,451 6,663 5,691 44,900 44,950 7,413 5,901 7,413 6,141 47,900 47,950 8,163 6,351 8,163 6,829
41,950 42,000 6,675 5,459 6,675 5,699 44,950 45,000 7,425 5,909 7,425 6,149 47,950 48,000 8,175 6,359 8,175 6,841
42,000 45,000 48,000
42,000 42,050 6,688 5,466 6,688 5,706 45,000 45,050 7,438 5,916 7,438 6,156 48,000 48,050 8,188 6,366 8,188 6,854
42,050 42,100 6,700 5,474 6,700 5,714 45,050 45,100 7,450 5,924 7,450 6,164 48,050 48,100 8,200 6,374 8,200 6,866
42,100 42,150 6,713 5,481 6,713 5,721 45,100 45,150 7,463 5,931 7,463 6,171 48,100 48,150 8,213 6,381 8,213 6,879
42,150 42,200 6,725 5,489 6,725 5,729 45,150 45,200 7,475 5,939 7,475 6,179 48,150 48,200 8,225 6,389 8,225 6,891
42,200 42,250 6,738 5,496 6,738 5,736 45,200 45,250 7,488 5,946 7,488 6,186 48,200 48,250 8,238 6,396 8,238 6,904
42,250 42,300 6,750 5,504 6,750 5,744 45,250 45,300 7,500 5,954 7,500 6,194 48,250 48,300 8,250 6,404 8,250 6,916
42,300 42,350 6,763 5,511 6,763 5,751 45,300 45,350 7,513 5,961 7,513 6,201 48,300 48,350 8,263 6,411 8,263 6,929
42,350 42,400 6,775 5,519 6,775 5,759 45,350 45,400 7,525 5,969 7,525 6,209 48,350 48,400 8,275 6,419 8,275 6,941
42,400 42,450 6,788 5,526 6,788 5,766 45,400 45,450 7,538 5,976 7,538 6,216 48,400 48,450 8,288 6,426 8,288 6,954
42,450 42,500 6,800 5,534 6,800 5,774 45,450 45,500 7,550 5,984 7,550 6,224 48,450 48,500 8,300 6,434 8,300 6,966
42,500 42,550 6,813 5,541 6,813 5,781 45,500 45,550 7,563 5,991 7,563 6,231 48,500 48,550 8,313 6,441 8,313 6,979
42,550 42,600 6,825 5,549 6,825 5,789 45,550 45,600 7,575 5,999 7,575 6,241 48,550 48,600 8,325 6,449 8,325 6,991
42,600 42,650 6,838 5,556 6,838 5,796 45,600 45,650 7,588 6,006 7,588 6,254 48,600 48,650 8,338 6,456 8,338 7,004
42,650 42,700 6,850 5,564 6,850 5,804 45,650 45,700 7,600 6,014 7,600 6,266 48,650 48,700 8,350 6,464 8,350 7,016
42,700 42,750 6,863 5,571 6,863 5,811 45,700 45,750 7,613 6,021 7,613 6,279 48,700 48,750 8,363 6,471 8,363 7,029
42,750 42,800 6,875 5,579 6,875 5,819 45,750 45,800 7,625 6,029 7,625 6,291 48,750 48,800 8,375 6,479 8,375 7,041
42,800 42,850 6,888 5,586 6,888 5,826 45,800 45,850 7,638 6,036 7,638 6,304 48,800 48,850 8,388 6,486 8,388 7,054
42,850 42,900 6,900 5,594 6,900 5,834 45,850 45,900 7,650 6,044 7,650 6,316 48,850 48,900 8,400 6,494 8,400 7,066
42,900 42,950 6,913 5,601 6,913 5,841 45,900 45,950 7,663 6,051 7,663 6,329 48,900 48,950 8,413 6,501 8,413 7,079
42,950 43,000 6,925 5,609 6,925 5,849 45,950 46,000 7,675 6,059 7,675 6,341 48,950 49,000 8,425 6,509 8,425 7,091
43,000 46,000 49,000
43,000 43,050 6,938 5,616 6,938 5,856 46,000 46,050 7,688 6,066 7,688 6,354 49,000 49,050 8,438 6,516 8,438 7,104
43,050 43,100 6,950 5,624 6,950 5,864 46,050 46,100 7,700 6,074 7,700 6,366 49,050 49,100 8,450 6,524 8,450 7,116
43,100 43,150 6,963 5,631 6,963 5,871 46,100 46,150 7,713 6,081 7,713 6,379 49,100 49,150 8,463 6,531 8,463 7,129
43,150 43,200 6,975 5,639 6,975 5,879 46,150 46,200 7,725 6,089 7,725 6,391 49,150 49,200 8,475 6,539 8,475 7,141
43,200 43,250 6,988 5,646 6,988 5,886 46,200 46,250 7,738 6,096 7,738 6,404 49,200 49,250 8,488 6,546 8,488 7,154
43,250 43,300 7,000 5,654 7,000 5,894 46,250 46,300 7,750 6,104 7,750 6,416 49,250 49,300 8,500 6,554 8,500 7,166
43,300 43,350 7,013 5,661 7,013 5,901 46,300 46,350 7,763 6,111 7,763 6,429 49,300 49,350 8,513 6,561 8,513 7,179
43,350 43,400 7,025 5,669 7,025 5,909 46,350 46,400 7,775 6,119 7,775 6,441 49,350 49,400 8,525 6,569 8,525 7,191
43,400 43,450 7,038 5,676 7,038 5,916 46,400 46,450 7,788 6,126 7,788 6,454 49,400 49,450 8,538 6,576 8,538 7,204
43,450 43,500 7,050 5,684 7,050 5,924 46,450 46,500 7,800 6,134 7,800 6,466 49,450 49,500 8,550 6,584 8,550 7,216
43,500 43,550 7,063 5,691 7,063 5,931 46,500 46,550 7,813 6,141 7,813 6,479 49,500 49,550 8,563 6,591 8,563 7,229
43,550 43,600 7,075 5,699 7,075 5,939 46,550 46,600 7,825 6,149 7,825 6,491 49,550 49,600 8,575 6,599 8,575 7,241
43,600 43,650 7,088 5,706 7,088 5,946 46,600 46,650 7,838 6,156 7,838 6,504 49,600 49,650 8,588 6,606 8,588 7,254
43,650 43,700 7,100 5,714 7,100 5,954 46,650 46,700 7,850 6,164 7,850 6,516 49,650 49,700 8,600 6,614 8,600 7,266
43,700 43,750 7,113 5,721 7,113 5,961 46,700 46,750 7,863 6,171 7,863 6,529 49,700 49,750 8,613 6,621 8,613 7,279
43,750 43,800 7,125 5,729 7,125 5,969 46,750 46,800 7,875 6,179 7,875 6,541 49,750 49,800 8,625 6,629 8,625 7,291
43,800 43,850 7,138 5,736 7,138 5,976 46,800 46,850 7,888 6,186 7,888 6,554 49,800 49,850 8,638 6,636 8,638 7,304
43,850 43,900 7,150 5,744 7,150 5,984 46,850 46,900 7,900 6,194 7,900 6,566 49,850 49,900 8,650 6,644 8,650 7,316
43,900 43,950 7,163 5,751 7,163 5,991 46,900 46,950 7,913 6,201 7,913 6,579 49,900 49,950 8,663 6,651 8,663 7,329
43,950 44,000 7,175 5,759 7,175 5,999 46,950 47,000 7,925 6,209 7,925 6,591 49,950 50,000 8,675 6,659 8,675 7,341
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 259 -

Page 262 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
50,000 53,000 56,000
50,000 50,050 8,688 6,666 8,688 7,354 53,000 53,050 9,438 7,116 9,438 8,104 56,000 56,050 10,188 7,566 10,188 8,854
50,050 50,100 8,700 6,674 8,700 7,366 53,050 53,100 9,450 7,124 9,450 8,116 56,050 56,100 10,200 7,574 10,200 8,866
50,100 50,150 8,713 6,681 8,713 7,379 53,100 53,150 9,463 7,131 9,463 8,129 56,100 56,150 10,213 7,581 10,213 8,879
50,150 50,200 8,725 6,689 8,725 7,391 53,150 53,200 9,475 7,139 9,475 8,141 56,150 56,200 10,225 7,589 10,225 8,891
50,200 50,250 8,738 6,696 8,738 7,404 53,200 53,250 9,488 7,146 9,488 8,154 56,200 56,250 10,238 7,596 10,238 8,904
50,250 50,300 8,750 6,704 8,750 7,416 53,250 53,300 9,500 7,154 9,500 8,166 56,250 56,300 10,250 7,604 10,250 8,916
50,300 50,350 8,763 6,711 8,763 7,429 53,300 53,350 9,513 7,161 9,513 8,179 56,300 56,350 10,263 7,611 10,263 8,929
50,350 50,400 8,775 6,719 8,775 7,441 53,350 53,400 9,525 7,169 9,525 8,191 56,350 56,400 10,275 7,619 10,275 8,941
50,400 50,450 8,788 6,726 8,788 7,454 53,400 53,450 9,538 7,176 9,538 8,204 56,400 56,450 10,288 7,626 10,288 8,954
50,450 50,500 8,800 6,734 8,800 7,466 53,450 53,500 9,550 7,184 9,550 8,216 56,450 56,500 10,300 7,634 10,300 8,966
50,500 50,550 8,813 6,741 8,813 7,479 53,500 53,550 9,563 7,191 9,563 8,229 56,500 56,550 10,313 7,641 10,313 8,979
50,550 50,600 8,825 6,749 8,825 7,491 53,550 53,600 9,575 7,199 9,575 8,241 56,550 56,600 10,325 7,649 10,325 8,991
50,600 50,650 8,838 6,756 8,838 7,504 53,600 53,650 9,588 7,206 9,588 8,254 56,600 56,650 10,338 7,656 10,338 9,004
50,650 50,700 8,850 6,764 8,850 7,516 53,650 53,700 9,600 7,214 9,600 8,266 56,650 56,700 10,350 7,664 10,350 9,016
50,700 50,750 8,863 6,771 8,863 7,529 53,700 53,750 9,613 7,221 9,613 8,279 56,700 56,750 10,363 7,671 10,363 9,029
50,750 50,800 8,875 6,779 8,875 7,541 53,750 53,800 9,625 7,229 9,625 8,291 56,750 56,800 10,375 7,679 10,375 9,041
50,800 50,850 8,888 6,786 8,888 7,554 53,800 53,850 9,638 7,236 9,638 8,304 56,800 56,850 10,388 7,686 10,388 9,054
50,850 50,900 8,900 6,794 8,900 7,566 53,850 53,900 9,650 7,244 9,650 8,316 56,850 56,900 10,400 7,694 10,400 9,066
50,900 50,950 8,913 6,801 8,913 7,579 53,900 53,950 9,663 7,251 9,663 8,329 56,900 56,950 10,413 7,701 10,413 9,079
50,950 51,000 8,925 6,809 8,925 7,591 53,950 54,000 9,675 7,259 9,675 8,341 56,950 57,000 10,425 7,709 10,425 9,091
51,000 54,000 57,000
51,000 51,050 8,938 6,816 8,938 7,604 54,000 54,050 9,688 7,266 9,688 8,354 57,000 57,050 10,438 7,716 10,438 9,104
51,050 51,100 8,950 6,824 8,950 7,616 54,050 54,100 9,700 7,274 9,700 8,366 57,050 57,100 10,450 7,724 10,450 9,116
51,100 51,150 8,963 6,831 8,963 7,629 54,100 54,150 9,713 7,281 9,713 8,379 57,100 57,150 10,463 7,731 10,463 9,129
51,150 51,200 8,975 6,839 8,975 7,641 54,150 54,200 9,725 7,289 9,725 8,391 57,150 57,200 10,475 7,739 10,475 9,141
51,200 51,250 8,988 6,846 8,988 7,654 54,200 54,250 9,738 7,296 9,738 8,404 57,200 57,250 10,488 7,746 10,488 9,154
51,250 51,300 9,000 6,854 9,000 7,666 54,250 54,300 9,750 7,304 9,750 8,416 57,250 57,300 10,500 7,754 10,500 9,166
51,300 51,350 9,013 6,861 9,013 7,679 54,300 54,350 9,763 7,311 9,763 8,429 57,300 57,350 10,513 7,761 10,513 9,179
51,350 51,400 9,025 6,869 9,025 7,691 54,350 54,400 9,775 7,319 9,775 8,441 57,350 57,400 10,525 7,769 10,525 9,191
51,400 51,450 9,038 6,876 9,038 7,704 54,400 54,450 9,788 7,326 9,788 8,454 57,400 57,450 10,538 7,776 10,538 9,204
51,450 51,500 9,050 6,884 9,050 7,716 54,450 54,500 9,800 7,334 9,800 8,466 57,450 57,500 10,550 7,784 10,550 9,216
51,500 51,550 9,063 6,891 9,063 7,729 54,500 54,550 9,813 7,341 9,813 8,479 57,500 57,550 10,563 7,791 10,563 9,229
51,550 51,600 9,075 6,899 9,075 7,741 54,550 54,600 9,825 7,349 9,825 8,491 57,550 57,600 10,575 7,799 10,575 9,241
51,600 51,650 9,088 6,906 9,088 7,754 54,600 54,650 9,838 7,356 9,838 8,504 57,600 57,650 10,588 7,806 10,588 9,254
51,650 51,700 9,100 6,914 9,100 7,766 54,650 54,700 9,850 7,364 9,850 8,516 57,650 57,700 10,600 7,814 10,600 9,266
51,700 51,750 9,113 6,921 9,113 7,779 54,700 54,750 9,863 7,371 9,863 8,529 57,700 57,750 10,613 7,821 10,613 9,279
51,750 51,800 9,125 6,929 9,125 7,791 54,750 54,800 9,875 7,379 9,875 8,541 57,750 57,800 10,625 7,829 10,625 9,291
51,800 51,850 9,138 6,936 9,138 7,804 54,800 54,850 9,888 7,386 9,888 8,554 57,800 57,850 10,638 7,836 10,638 9,304
51,850 51,900 9,150 6,944 9,150 7,816 54,850 54,900 9,900 7,394 9,900 8,566 57,850 57,900 10,650 7,844 10,650 9,316
51,900 51,950 9,163 6,951 9,163 7,829 54,900 54,950 9,913 7,401 9,913 8,579 57,900 57,950 10,663 7,851 10,663 9,329
51,950 52,000 9,175 6,959 9,175 7,841 54,950 55,000 9,925 7,409 9,925 8,591 57,950 58,000 10,675 7,859 10,675 9,341
52,000 55,000 58,000
52,000 52,050 9,188 6,966 9,188 7,854 55,000 55,050 9,938 7,416 9,938 8,604 58,000 58,050 10,688 7,866 10,688 9,354
52,050 52,100 9,200 6,974 9,200 7,866 55,050 55,100 9,950 7,424 9,950 8,616 58,050 58,100 10,700 7,874 10,700 9,366
52,100 52,150 9,213 6,981 9,213 7,879 55,100 55,150 9,963 7,431 9,963 8,629 58,100 58,150 10,713 7,881 10,713 9,379
52,150 52,200 9,225 6,989 9,225 7,891 55,150 55,200 9,975 7,439 9,975 8,641 58,150 58,200 10,725 7,889 10,725 9,391
52,200 52,250 9,238 6,996 9,238 7,904 55,200 55,250 9,988 7,446 9,988 8,654 58,200 58,250 10,738 7,896 10,738 9,404
52,250 52,300 9,250 7,004 9,250 7,916 55,250 55,300 10,000 7,454 10,000 8,666 58,250 58,300 10,750 7,904 10,750 9,416
52,300 52,350 9,263 7,011 9,263 7,929 55,300 55,350 10,013 7,461 10,013 8,679 58,300 58,350 10,763 7,911 10,763 9,429
52,350 52,400 9,275 7,019 9,275 7,941 55,350 55,400 10,025 7,469 10,025 8,691 58,350 58,400 10,775 7,919 10,775 9,441
52,400 52,450 9,288 7,026 9,288 7,954 55,400 55,450 10,038 7,476 10,038 8,704 58,400 58,450 10,788 7,926 10,788 9,454
52,450 52,500 9,300 7,034 9,300 7,966 55,450 55,500 10,050 7,484 10,050 8,716 58,450 58,500 10,800 7,934 10,800 9,466
52,500 52,550 9,313 7,041 9,313 7,979 55,500 55,550 10,063 7,491 10,063 8,729 58,500 58,550 10,813 7,941 10,813 9,479
52,550 52,600 9,325 7,049 9,325 7,991 55,550 55,600 10,075 7,499 10,075 8,741 58,550 58,600 10,825 7,949 10,825 9,491
52,600 52,650 9,338 7,056 9,338 8,004 55,600 55,650 10,088 7,506 10,088 8,754 58,600 58,650 10,838 7,956 10,838 9,504
52,650 52,700 9,350 7,064 9,350 8,016 55,650 55,700 10,100 7,514 10,100 8,766 58,650 58,700 10,850 7,964 10,850 9,516
52,700 52,750 9,363 7,071 9,363 8,029 55,700 55,750 10,113 7,521 10,113 8,779 58,700 58,750 10,863 7,971 10,863 9,529
52,750 52,800 9,375 7,079 9,375 8,041 55,750 55,800 10,125 7,529 10,125 8,791 58,750 58,800 10,875 7,979 10,875 9,541
52,800 52,850 9,388 7,086 9,388 8,054 55,800 55,850 10,138 7,536 10,138 8,804 58,800 58,850 10,888 7,986 10,888 9,554
52,850 52,900 9,400 7,094 9,400 8,066 55,850 55,900 10,150 7,544 10,150 8,816 58,850 58,900 10,900 7,994 10,900 9,566
52,900 52,950 9,413 7,101 9,413 8,079 55,900 55,950 10,163 7,551 10,163 8,829 58,900 58,950 10,913 8,001 10,913 9,579
52,950 53,000 9,425 7,109 9,425 8,091 55,950 56,000 10,175 7,559 10,175 8,841 58,950 59,000 10,925 8,009 10,925 9,591
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 260 -

Page 263 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
59,000 62,000 65,000
59,000 59,050 10,938 8,016 10,938 9,604 62,000 62,050 11,688 8,466 11,688 10,354 65,000 65,050 12,438 8,916 12,438 11,104
59,050 59,100 10,950 8,024 10,950 9,616 62,050 62,100 11,700 8,474 11,700 10,366 65,050 65,100 12,450 8,924 12,450 11,116
59,100 59,150 10,963 8,031 10,963 9,629 62,100 62,150 11,713 8,481 11,713 10,379 65,100 65,150 12,463 8,931 12,463 11,129
59,150 59,200 10,975 8,039 10,975 9,641 62,150 62,200 11,725 8,489 11,725 10,391 65,150 65,200 12,475 8,939 12,475 11,141
59,200 59,250 10,988 8,046 10,988 9,654 62,200 62,250 11,738 8,496 11,738 10,404 65,200 65,250 12,488 8,946 12,488 11,154
59,250 59,300 11,000 8,054 11,000 9,666 62,250 62,300 11,750 8,504 11,750 10,416 65,250 65,300 12,500 8,954 12,500 11,166
59,300 59,350 11,013 8,061 11,013 9,679 62,300 62,350 11,763 8,511 11,763 10,429 65,300 65,350 12,513 8,961 12,513 11,179
59,350 59,400 11,025 8,069 11,025 9,691 62,350 62,400 11,775 8,519 11,775 10,441 65,350 65,400 12,525 8,969 12,525 11,191
59,400 59,450 11,038 8,076 11,038 9,704 62,400 62,450 11,788 8,526 11,788 10,454 65,400 65,450 12,538 8,976 12,538 11,204
59,450 59,500 11,050 8,084 11,050 9,716 62,450 62,500 11,800 8,534 11,800 10,466 65,450 65,500 12,550 8,984 12,550 11,216
59,500 59,550 11,063 8,091 11,063 9,729 62,500 62,550 11,813 8,541 11,813 10,479 65,500 65,550 12,563 8,991 12,563 11,229
59,550 59,600 11,075 8,099 11,075 9,741 62,550 62,600 11,825 8,549 11,825 10,491 65,550 65,600 12,575 8,999 12,575 11,241
59,600 59,650 11,088 8,106 11,088 9,754 62,600 62,650 11,838 8,556 11,838 10,504 65,600 65,650 12,588 9,006 12,588 11,254
59,650 59,700 11,100 8,114 11,100 9,766 62,650 62,700 11,850 8,564 11,850 10,516 65,650 65,700 12,600 9,014 12,600 11,266
59,700 59,750 11,113 8,121 11,113 9,779 62,700 62,750 11,863 8,571 11,863 10,529 65,700 65,750 12,613 9,021 12,613 11,279
59,750 59,800 11,125 8,129 11,125 9,791 62,750 62,800 11,875 8,579 11,875 10,541 65,750 65,800 12,625 9,029 12,625 11,291
59,800 59,850 11,138 8,136 11,138 9,804 62,800 62,850 11,888 8,586 11,888 10,554 65,800 65,850 12,638 9,036 12,638 11,304
59,850 59,900 11,150 8,144 11,150 9,816 62,850 62,900 11,900 8,594 11,900 10,566 65,850 65,900 12,650 9,044 12,650 11,316
59,900 59,950 11,163 8,151 11,163 9,829 62,900 62,950 11,913 8,601 11,913 10,579 65,900 65,950 12,663 9,051 12,663 11,329
59,950 60,000 11,175 8,159 11,175 9,841 62,950 63,000 11,925 8,609 11,925 10,591 65,950 66,000 12,675 9,059 12,675 11,341
60,000 63,000 66,000
60,000 60,050 11,188 8,166 11,188 9,854 63,000 63,050 11,938 8,616 11,938 10,604 66,000 66,050 12,688 9,066 12,688 11,354
60,050 60,100 11,200 8,174 11,200 9,866 63,050 63,100 11,950 8,624 11,950 10,616 66,050 66,100 12,700 9,074 12,700 11,366
60,100 60,150 11,213 8,181 11,213 9,879 63,100 63,150 11,963 8,631 11,963 10,629 66,100 66,150 12,713 9,081 12,713 11,379
60,150 60,200 11,225 8,189 11,225 9,891 63,150 63,200 11,975 8,639 11,975 10,641 66,150 66,200 12,725 9,089 12,725 11,391
60,200 60,250 11,238 8,196 11,238 9,904 63,200 63,250 11,988 8,646 11,988 10,654 66,200 66,250 12,738 9,096 12,738 11,404
60,250 60,300 11,250 8,204 11,250 9,916 63,250 63,300 12,000 8,654 12,000 10,666 66,250 66,300 12,750 9,104 12,750 11,416
60,300 60,350 11,263 8,211 11,263 9,929 63,300 63,350 12,013 8,661 12,013 10,679 66,300 66,350 12,763 9,111 12,763 11,429
60,350 60,400 11,275 8,219 11,275 9,941 63,350 63,400 12,025 8,669 12,025 10,691 66,350 66,400 12,775 9,119 12,775 11,441
60,400 60,450 11,288 8,226 11,288 9,954 63,400 63,450 12,038 8,676 12,038 10,704 66,400 66,450 12,788 9,126 12,788 11,454
60,450 60,500 11,300 8,234 11,300 9,966 63,450 63,500 12,050 8,684 12,050 10,716 66,450 66,500 12,800 9,134 12,800 11,466
60,500 60,550 11,313 8,241 11,313 9,979 63,500 63,550 12,063 8,691 12,063 10,729 66,500 66,550 12,813 9,141 12,813 11,479
60,550 60,600 11,325 8,249 11,325 9,991 63,550 63,600 12,075 8,699 12,075 10,741 66,550 66,600 12,825 9,149 12,825 11,491
60,600 60,650 11,338 8,256 11,338 10,004 63,600 63,650 12,088 8,706 12,088 10,754 66,600 66,650 12,838 9,156 12,838 11,504
60,650 60,700 11,350 8,264 11,350 10,016 63,650 63,700 12,100 8,714 12,100 10,766 66,650 66,700 12,850 9,164 12,850 11,516
60,700 60,750 11,363 8,271 11,363 10,029 63,700 63,750 12,113 8,721 12,113 10,779 66,700 66,750 12,863 9,171 12,863 11,529
60,750 60,800 11,375 8,279 11,375 10,041 63,750 63,800 12,125 8,729 12,125 10,791 66,750 66,800 12,875 9,179 12,875 11,541
60,800 60,850 11,388 8,286 11,388 10,054 63,800 63,850 12,138 8,736 12,138 10,804 66,800 66,850 12,888 9,186 12,888 11,554
60,850 60,900 11,400 8,294 11,400 10,066 63,850 63,900 12,150 8,744 12,150 10,816 66,850 66,900 12,900 9,194 12,900 11,566
60,900 60,950 11,413 8,301 11,413 10,079 63,900 63,950 12,163 8,751 12,163 10,829 66,900 66,950 12,913 9,201 12,913 11,579
60,950 61,000 11,425 8,309 11,425 10,091 63,950 64,000 12,175 8,759 12,175 10,841 66,950 67,000 12,925 9,209 12,925 11,591
61,000 64,000 67,000
61,000 61,050 11,438 8,316 11,438 10,104 64,000 64,050 12,188 8,766 12,188 10,854 67,000 67,050 12,938 9,216 12,938 11,604
61,050 61,100 11,450 8,324 11,450 10,116 64,050 64,100 12,200 8,774 12,200 10,866 67,050 67,100 12,950 9,224 12,950 11,616
61,100 61,150 11,463 8,331 11,463 10,129 64,100 64,150 12,213 8,781 12,213 10,879 67,100 67,150 12,963 9,231 12,963 11,629
61,150 61,200 11,475 8,339 11,475 10,141 64,150 64,200 12,225 8,789 12,225 10,891 67,150 67,200 12,975 9,239 12,975 11,641
61,200 61,250 11,488 8,346 11,488 10,154 64,200 64,250 12,238 8,796 12,238 10,904 67,200 67,250 12,988 9,246 12,988 11,654
61,250 61,300 11,500 8,354 11,500 10,166 64,250 64,300 12,250 8,804 12,250 10,916 67,250 67,300 13,000 9,254 13,000 11,666
61,300 61,350 11,513 8,361 11,513 10,179 64,300 64,350 12,263 8,811 12,263 10,929 67,300 67,350 13,013 9,261 13,013 11,679
61,350 61,400 11,525 8,369 11,525 10,191 64,350 64,400 12,275 8,819 12,275 10,941 67,350 67,400 13,025 9,269 13,025 11,691
61,400 61,450 11,538 8,376 11,538 10,204 64,400 64,450 12,288 8,826 12,288 10,954 67,400 67,450 13,038 9,276 13,038 11,704
61,450 61,500 11,550 8,384 11,550 10,216 64,450 64,500 12,300 8,834 12,300 10,966 67,450 67,500 13,050 9,284 13,050 11,716
61,500 61,550 11,563 8,391 11,563 10,229 64,500 64,550 12,313 8,841 12,313 10,979 67,500 67,550 13,063 9,291 13,063 11,729
61,550 61,600 11,575 8,399 11,575 10,241 64,550 64,600 12,325 8,849 12,325 10,991 67,550 67,600 13,075 9,299 13,075 11,741
61,600 61,650 11,588 8,406 11,588 10,254 64,600 64,650 12,338 8,856 12,338 11,004 67,600 67,650 13,088 9,306 13,088 11,754
61,650 61,700 11,600 8,414 11,600 10,266 64,650 64,700 12,350 8,864 12,350 11,016 67,650 67,700 13,100 9,314 13,100 11,766
61,700 61,750 11,613 8,421 11,613 10,279 64,700 64,750 12,363 8,871 12,363 11,029 67,700 67,750 13,113 9,321 13,113 11,779
61,750 61,800 11,625 8,429 11,625 10,291 64,750 64,800 12,375 8,879 12,375 11,041 67,750 67,800 13,125 9,329 13,125 11,791
61,800 61,850 11,638 8,436 11,638 10,304 64,800 64,850 12,388 8,886 12,388 11,054 67,800 67,850 13,138 9,336 13,138 11,804
61,850 61,900 11,650 8,444 11,650 10,316 64,850 64,900 12,400 8,894 12,400 11,066 67,850 67,900 13,150 9,344 13,150 11,816
61,900 61,950 11,663 8,451 11,663 10,329 64,900 64,950 12,413 8,901 12,413 11,079 67,900 67,950 13,163 9,351 13,163 11,829
61,950 62,000 11,675 8,459 11,675 10,341 64,950 65,000 12,425 8,909 12,425 11,091 67,950 68,000 13,175 9,359 13,175 11,841
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 261 -

Page 264 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
68,000 71,000 74,000
68,000 68,050 13,188 9,369 13,188 11,854 71,000 71,050 13,938 10,119 14,009 12,604 74,000 74,050 14,688 10,869 14,849 13,354
68,050 68,100 13,200 9,381 13,200 11,866 71,050 71,100 13,950 10,131 14,023 12,616 74,050 74,100 14,700 10,881 14,863 13,366
68,100 68,150 13,213 9,394 13,213 11,879 71,100 71,150 13,963 10,144 14,037 12,629 74,100 74,150 14,713 10,894 14,877 13,379
68,150 68,200 13,225 9,406 13,225 11,891 71,150 71,200 13,975 10,156 14,051 12,641 74,150 74,200 14,725 10,906 14,891 13,391
68,200 68,250 13,238 9,419 13,238 11,904 71,200 71,250 13,988 10,169 14,065 12,654 74,200 74,250 14,738 10,919 14,905 13,404
68,250 68,300 13,250 9,431 13,250 11,916 71,250 71,300 14,000 10,181 14,079 12,666 74,250 74,300 14,750 10,931 14,919 13,416
68,300 68,350 13,263 9,444 13,263 11,929 71,300 71,350 14,013 10,194 14,093 12,679 74,300 74,350 14,763 10,944 14,933 13,429
68,350 68,400 13,275 9,456 13,275 11,941 71,350 71,400 14,025 10,206 14,107 12,691 74,350 74,400 14,775 10,956 14,947 13,441
68,400 68,450 13,288 9,469 13,288 11,954 71,400 71,450 14,038 10,219 14,121 12,704 74,400 74,450 14,788 10,969 14,961 13,454
68,450 68,500 13,300 9,481 13,300 11,966 71,450 71,500 14,050 10,231 14,135 12,716 74,450 74,500 14,800 10,981 14,975 13,466
68,500 68,550 13,313 9,494 13,313 11,979 71,500 71,550 14,063 10,244 14,149 12,729 74,500 74,550 14,813 10,994 14,989 13,479
68,550 68,600 13,325 9,506 13,325 11,991 71,550 71,600 14,075 10,256 14,163 12,741 74,550 74,600 14,825 11,006 15,003 13,491
68,600 68,650 13,338 9,519 13,338 12,004 71,600 71,650 14,088 10,269 14,177 12,754 74,600 74,650 14,838 11,019 15,017 13,504
68,650 68,700 13,350 9,531 13,351 12,016 71,650 71,700 14,100 10,281 14,191 12,766 74,650 74,700 14,850 11,031 15,031 13,516
68,700 68,750 13,363 9,544 13,365 12,029 71,700 71,750 14,113 10,294 14,205 12,779 74,700 74,750 14,863 11,044 15,045 13,529
68,750 68,800 13,375 9,556 13,379 12,041 71,750 71,800 14,125 10,306 14,219 12,791 74,750 74,800 14,875 11,056 15,059 13,541
68,800 68,850 13,388 9,569 13,393 12,054 71,800 71,850 14,138 10,319 14,233 12,804 74,800 74,850 14,888 11,069 15,073 13,554
68,850 68,900 13,400 9,581 13,407 12,066 71,850 71,900 14,150 10,331 14,247 12,816 74,850 74,900 14,900 11,081 15,087 13,566
68,900 68,950 13,413 9,594 13,421 12,079 71,900 71,950 14,163 10,344 14,261 12,829 74,900 74,950 14,913 11,094 15,101 13,579
68,950 69,000 13,425 9,606 13,435 12,091 71,950 72,000 14,175 10,356 14,275 12,841 74,950 75,000 14,925 11,106 15,115 13,591
69,000 72,000 75,000
69,000 69,050 13,438 9,619 13,449 12,104 72,000 72,050 14,188 10,369 14,289 12,854 75,000 75,050 14,938 11,119 15,129 13,604
69,050 69,100 13,450 9,631 13,463 12,116 72,050 72,100 14,200 10,381 14,303 12,866 75,050 75,100 14,950 11,131 15,143 13,616
69,100 69,150 13,463 9,644 13,477 12,129 72,100 72,150 14,213 10,394 14,317 12,879 75,100 75,150 14,963 11,144 15,157 13,629
69,150 69,200 13,475 9,656 13,491 12,141 72,150 72,200 14,225 10,406 14,331 12,891 75,150 75,200 14,975 11,156 15,171 13,641
69,200 69,250 13,488 9,669 13,505 12,154 72,200 72,250 14,238 10,419 14,345 12,904 75,200 75,250 14,988 11,169 15,185 13,654
69,250 69,300 13,500 9,681 13,519 12,166 72,250 72,300 14,250 10,431 14,359 12,916 75,250 75,300 15,000 11,181 15,199 13,666
69,300 69,350 13,513 9,694 13,533 12,179 72,300 72,350 14,263 10,444 14,373 12,929 75,300 75,350 15,013 11,194 15,213 13,679
69,350 69,400 13,525 9,706 13,547 12,191 72,350 72,400 14,275 10,456 14,387 12,941 75,350 75,400 15,025 11,206 15,227 13,691
69,400 69,450 13,538 9,719 13,561 12,204 72,400 72,450 14,288 10,469 14,401 12,954 75,400 75,450 15,038 11,219 15,241 13,704
69,450 69,500 13,550 9,731 13,575 12,216 72,450 72,500 14,300 10,481 14,415 12,966 75,450 75,500 15,050 11,231 15,255 13,716
69,500 69,550 13,563 9,744 13,589 12,229 72,500 72,550 14,313 10,494 14,429 12,979 75,500 75,550 15,063 11,244 15,269 13,729
69,550 69,600 13,575 9,756 13,603 12,241 72,550 72,600 14,325 10,506 14,443 12,991 75,550 75,600 15,075 11,256 15,283 13,741
69,600 69,650 13,588 9,769 13,617 12,254 72,600 72,650 14,338 10,519 14,457 13,004 75,600 75,650 15,088 11,269 15,297 13,754
69,650 69,700 13,600 9,781 13,631 12,266 72,650 72,700 14,350 10,531 14,471 13,016 75,650 75,700 15,100 11,281 15,311 13,766
69,700 69,750 13,613 9,794 13,645 12,279 72,700 72,750 14,363 10,544 14,485 13,029 75,700 75,750 15,113 11,294 15,325 13,779
69,750 69,800 13,625 9,806 13,659 12,291 72,750 72,800 14,375 10,556 14,499 13,041 75,750 75,800 15,125 11,306 15,339 13,791
69,800 69,850 13,638 9,819 13,673 12,304 72,800 72,850 14,388 10,569 14,513 13,054 75,800 75,850 15,138 11,319 15,353 13,804
69,850 69,900 13,650 9,831 13,687 12,316 72,850 72,900 14,400 10,581 14,527 13,066 75,850 75,900 15,150 11,331 15,367 13,816
69,900 69,950 13,663 9,844 13,701 12,329 72,900 72,950 14,413 10,594 14,541 13,079 75,900 75,950 15,163 11,344 15,381 13,829
69,950 70,000 13,675 9,856 13,715 12,341 72,950 73,000 14,425 10,606 14,555 13,091 75,950 76,000 15,175 11,356 15,395 13,841
70,000 73,000 76,000
70,000 70,050 13,688 9,869 13,729 12,354 73,000 73,050 14,438 10,619 14,569 13,104 76,000 76,050 15,188 11,369 15,409 13,854
70,050 70,100 13,700 9,881 13,743 12,366 73,050 73,100 14,450 10,631 14,583 13,116 76,050 76,100 15,200 11,381 15,423 13,866
70,100 70,150 13,713 9,894 13,757 12,379 73,100 73,150 14,463 10,644 14,597 13,129 76,100 76,150 15,213 11,394 15,437 13,879
70,150 70,200 13,725 9,906 13,771 12,391 73,150 73,200 14,475 10,656 14,611 13,141 76,150 76,200 15,225 11,406 15,451 13,891
70,200 70,250 13,738 9,919 13,785 12,404 73,200 73,250 14,488 10,669 14,625 13,154 76,200 76,250 15,238 11,419 15,465 13,904
70,250 70,300 13,750 9,931 13,799 12,416 73,250 73,300 14,500 10,681 14,639 13,166 76,250 76,300 15,250 11,431 15,479 13,916
70,300 70,350 13,763 9,944 13,813 12,429 73,300 73,350 14,513 10,694 14,653 13,179 76,300 76,350 15,263 11,444 15,493 13,929
70,350 70,400 13,775 9,956 13,827 12,441 73,350 73,400 14,525 10,706 14,667 13,191 76,350 76,400 15,275 11,456 15,507 13,941
70,400 70,450 13,788 9,969 13,841 12,454 73,400 73,450 14,538 10,719 14,681 13,204 76,400 76,450 15,288 11,469 15,521 13,954
70,450 70,500 13,800 9,981 13,855 12,466 73,450 73,500 14,550 10,731 14,695 13,216 76,450 76,500 15,300 11,481 15,535 13,966
70,500 70,550 13,813 9,994 13,869 12,479 73,500 73,550 14,563 10,744 14,709 13,229 76,500 76,550 15,313 11,494 15,549 13,979
70,550 70,600 13,825 10,006 13,883 12,491 73,550 73,600 14,575 10,756 14,723 13,241 76,550 76,600 15,325 11,506 15,563 13,991
70,600 70,650 13,838 10,019 13,897 12,504 73,600 73,650 14,588 10,769 14,737 13,254 76,600 76,650 15,338 11,519 15,577 14,004
70,650 70,700 13,850 10,031 13,911 12,516 73,650 73,700 14,600 10,781 14,751 13,266 76,650 76,700 15,350 11,531 15,591 14,016
70,700 70,750 13,863 10,044 13,925 12,529 73,700 73,750 14,613 10,794 14,765 13,279 76,700 76,750 15,363 11,544 15,605 14,029
70,750 70,800 13,875 10,056 13,939 12,541 73,750 73,800 14,625 10,806 14,779 13,291 76,750 76,800 15,375 11,556 15,619 14,041
70,800 70,850 13,888 10,069 13,953 12,554 73,800 73,850 14,638 10,819 14,793 13,304 76,800 76,850 15,388 11,569 15,633 14,054
70,850 70,900 13,900 10,081 13,967 12,566 73,850 73,900 14,650 10,831 14,807 13,316 76,850 76,900 15,400 11,581 15,647 14,066
70,900 70,950 13,913 10,094 13,981 12,579 73,900 73,950 14,663 10,844 14,821 13,329 76,900 76,950 15,413 11,594 15,661 14,079
70,950 71,000 13,925 10,106 13,995 12,591 73,950 74,000 14,675 10,856 14,835 13,341 76,950 77,000 15,425 11,606 15,675 14,091
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 262 -

Page 265 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
77,000 80,000 83,000
77,000 77,050 15,438 11,619 15,689 14,104 80,000 80,050 16,188 12,369 16,529 14,854 83,000 83,050 16,956 13,119 17,369 15,604
77,050 77,100 15,450 11,631 15,703 14,116 80,050 80,100 16,200 12,381 16,543 14,866 83,050 83,100 16,970 13,131 17,383 15,616
77,100 77,150 15,463 11,644 15,717 14,129 80,100 80,150 16,213 12,394 16,557 14,879 83,100 83,150 16,984 13,144 17,397 15,629
77,150 77,200 15,475 11,656 15,731 14,141 80,150 80,200 16,225 12,406 16,571 14,891 83,150 83,200 16,998 13,156 17,411 15,641
77,200 77,250 15,488 11,669 15,745 14,154 80,200 80,250 16,238 12,419 16,585 14,904 83,200 83,250 17,012 13,169 17,425 15,654
77,250 77,300 15,500 11,681 15,759 14,166 80,250 80,300 16,250 12,431 16,599 14,916 83,250 83,300 17,026 13,181 17,439 15,666
77,300 77,350 15,513 11,694 15,773 14,179 80,300 80,350 16,263 12,444 16,613 14,929 83,300 83,350 17,040 13,194 17,453 15,679
77,350 77,400 15,525 11,706 15,787 14,191 80,350 80,400 16,275 12,456 16,627 14,941 83,350 83,400 17,054 13,206 17,467 15,691
77,400 77,450 15,538 11,719 15,801 14,204 80,400 80,450 16,288 12,469 16,641 14,954 83,400 83,450 17,068 13,219 17,481 15,704
77,450 77,500 15,550 11,731 15,815 14,216 80,450 80,500 16,300 12,481 16,655 14,966 83,450 83,500 17,082 13,231 17,495 15,716
77,500 77,550 15,563 11,744 15,829 14,229 80,500 80,550 16,313 12,494 16,669 14,979 83,500 83,550 17,096 13,244 17,509 15,729
77,550 77,600 15,575 11,756 15,843 14,241 80,550 80,600 16,325 12,506 16,683 14,991 83,550 83,600 17,110 13,256 17,523 15,741
77,600 77,650 15,588 11,769 15,857 14,254 80,600 80,650 16,338 12,519 16,697 15,004 83,600 83,650 17,124 13,269 17,537 15,754
77,650 77,700 15,600 11,781 15,871 14,266 80,650 80,700 16,350 12,531 16,711 15,016 83,650 83,700 17,138 13,281 17,551 15,766
77,700 77,750 15,613 11,794 15,885 14,279 80,700 80,750 16,363 12,544 16,725 15,029 83,700 83,750 17,152 13,294 17,565 15,779
77,750 77,800 15,625 11,806 15,899 14,291 80,750 80,800 16,375 12,556 16,739 15,041 83,750 83,800 17,166 13,306 17,579 15,791
77,800 77,850 15,638 11,819 15,913 14,304 80,800 80,850 16,388 12,569 16,753 15,054 83,800 83,850 17,180 13,319 17,593 15,804
77,850 77,900 15,650 11,831 15,927 14,316 80,850 80,900 16,400 12,581 16,767 15,066 83,850 83,900 17,194 13,331 17,607 15,816
77,900 77,950 15,663 11,844 15,941 14,329 80,900 80,950 16,413 12,594 16,781 15,079 83,900 83,950 17,208 13,344 17,621 15,829
77,950 78,000 15,675 11,856 15,955 14,341 80,950 81,000 16,425 12,606 16,795 15,091 83,950 84,000 17,222 13,356 17,635 15,841
78,000 81,000 84,000
78,000 78,050 15,688 11,869 15,969 14,354 81,000 81,050 16,438 12,619 16,809 15,104 84,000 84,050 17,236 13,369 17,649 15,854
78,050 78,100 15,700 11,881 15,983 14,366 81,050 81,100 16,450 12,631 16,823 15,116 84,050 84,100 17,250 13,381 17,663 15,866
78,100 78,150 15,713 11,894 15,997 14,379 81,100 81,150 16,463 12,644 16,837 15,129 84,100 84,150 17,264 13,394 17,677 15,879
78,150 78,200 15,725 11,906 16,011 14,391 81,150 81,200 16,475 12,656 16,851 15,141 84,150 84,200 17,278 13,406 17,691 15,891
78,200 78,250 15,738 11,919 16,025 14,404 81,200 81,250 16,488 12,669 16,865 15,154 84,200 84,250 17,292 13,419 17,705 15,904
78,250 78,300 15,750 11,931 16,039 14,416 81,250 81,300 16,500 12,681 16,879 15,166 84,250 84,300 17,306 13,431 17,719 15,916
78,300 78,350 15,763 11,944 16,053 14,429 81,300 81,350 16,513 12,694 16,893 15,179 84,300 84,350 17,320 13,444 17,733 15,929
78,350 78,400 15,775 11,956 16,067 14,441 81,350 81,400 16,525 12,706 16,907 15,191 84,350 84,400 17,334 13,456 17,747 15,941
78,400 78,450 15,788 11,969 16,081 14,454 81,400 81,450 16,538 12,719 16,921 15,204 84,400 84,450 17,348 13,469 17,761 15,954
78,450 78,500 15,800 11,981 16,095 14,466 81,450 81,500 16,550 12,731 16,935 15,216 84,450 84,500 17,362 13,481 17,775 15,966
78,500 78,550 15,813 11,994 16,109 14,479 81,500 81,550 16,563 12,744 16,949 15,229 84,500 84,550 17,376 13,494 17,789 15,979
78,550 78,600 15,825 12,006 16,123 14,491 81,550 81,600 16,575 12,756 16,963 15,241 84,550 84,600 17,390 13,506 17,803 15,991
78,600 78,650 15,838 12,019 16,137 14,504 81,600 81,650 16,588 12,769 16,977 15,254 84,600 84,650 17,404 13,519 17,817 16,004
78,650 78,700 15,850 12,031 16,151 14,516 81,650 81,700 16,600 12,781 16,991 15,266 84,650 84,700 17,418 13,531 17,831 16,016
78,700 78,750 15,863 12,044 16,165 14,529 81,700 81,750 16,613 12,794 17,005 15,279 84,700 84,750 17,432 13,544 17,845 16,029
78,750 78,800 15,875 12,056 16,179 14,541 81,750 81,800 16,625 12,806 17,019 15,291 84,750 84,800 17,446 13,556 17,859 16,041
78,800 78,850 15,888 12,069 16,193 14,554 81,800 81,850 16,638 12,819 17,033 15,304 84,800 84,850 17,460 13,569 17,873 16,054
78,850 78,900 15,900 12,081 16,207 14,566 81,850 81,900 16,650 12,831 17,047 15,316 84,850 84,900 17,474 13,581 17,887 16,066
78,900 78,950 15,913 12,094 16,221 14,579 81,900 81,950 16,663 12,844 17,061 15,329 84,900 84,950 17,488 13,594 17,901 16,079
78,950 79,000 15,925 12,106 16,235 14,591 81,950 82,000 16,675 12,856 17,075 15,341 84,950 85,000 17,502 13,606 17,915 16,091
79,000 82,000 85,000
79,000 79,050 15,938 12,119 16,249 14,604 82,000 82,050 16,688 12,869 17,089 15,354 85,000 85,050 17,516 13,619 17,929 16,104
79,050 79,100 15,950 12,131 16,263 14,616 82,050 82,100 16,700 12,881 17,103 15,366 85,050 85,100 17,530 13,631 17,943 16,116
79,100 79,150 15,963 12,144 16,277 14,629 82,100 82,150 16,713 12,894 17,117 15,379 85,100 85,150 17,544 13,644 17,957 16,129
79,150 79,200 15,975 12,156 16,291 14,641 82,150 82,200 16,725 12,906 17,131 15,391 85,150 85,200 17,558 13,656 17,971 16,141
79,200 79,250 15,988 12,169 16,305 14,654 82,200 82,250 16,738 12,919 17,145 15,404 85,200 85,250 17,572 13,669 17,985 16,154
79,250 79,300 16,000 12,181 16,319 14,666 82,250 82,300 16,750 12,931 17,159 15,416 85,250 85,300 17,586 13,681 17,999 16,166
79,300 79,350 16,013 12,194 16,333 14,679 82,300 82,350 16,763 12,944 17,173 15,429 85,300 85,350 17,600 13,694 18,013 16,179
79,350 79,400 16,025 12,206 16,347 14,691 82,350 82,400 16,775 12,956 17,187 15,441 85,350 85,400 17,614 13,706 18,027 16,191
79,400 79,450 16,038 12,219 16,361 14,704 82,400 82,450 16,788 12,969 17,201 15,454 85,400 85,450 17,628 13,719 18,041 16,204
79,450 79,500 16,050 12,231 16,375 14,716 82,450 82,500 16,802 12,981 17,215 15,466 85,450 85,500 17,642 13,731 18,055 16,216
79,500 79,550 16,063 12,244 16,389 14,729 82,500 82,550 16,816 12,994 17,229 15,479 85,500 85,550 17,656 13,744 18,069 16,229
79,550 79,600 16,075 12,256 16,403 14,741 82,550 82,600 16,830 13,006 17,243 15,491 85,550 85,600 17,670 13,756 18,083 16,241
79,600 79,650 16,088 12,269 16,417 14,754 82,600 82,650 16,844 13,019 17,257 15,504 85,600 85,650 17,684 13,769 18,097 16,254
79,650 79,700 16,100 12,281 16,431 14,766 82,650 82,700 16,858 13,031 17,271 15,516 85,650 85,700 17,698 13,781 18,111 16,266
79,700 79,750 16,113 12,294 16,445 14,779 82,700 82,750 16,872 13,044 17,285 15,529 85,700 85,750 17,712 13,794 18,125 16,279
79,750 79,800 16,125 12,306 16,459 14,791 82,750 82,800 16,886 13,056 17,299 15,541 85,750 85,800 17,726 13,806 18,139 16,291
79,800 79,850 16,138 12,319 16,473 14,804 82,800 82,850 16,900 13,069 17,313 15,554 85,800 85,850 17,740 13,819 18,153 16,304
79,850 79,900 16,150 12,331 16,487 14,816 82,850 82,900 16,914 13,081 17,327 15,566 85,850 85,900 17,754 13,831 18,167 16,316
79,900 79,950 16,163 12,344 16,501 14,829 82,900 82,950 16,928 13,094 17,341 15,579 85,900 85,950 17,768 13,844 18,181 16,329
79,950 80,000 16,175 12,356 16,515 14,841 82,950 83,000 16,942 13,106 17,355 15,591 85,950 86,000 17,782 13,856 18,195 16,341
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 263 -

Page 266 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
86,000 89,000 92,000
86,000 86,050 17,796 13,869 18,209 16,354 89,000 89,050 18,636 14,619 19,049 17,104 92,000 92,050 19,476 15,369 19,889 17,854
86,050 86,100 17,810 13,881 18,223 16,366 89,050 89,100 18,650 14,631 19,063 17,116 92,050 92,100 19,490 15,381 19,903 17,866
86,100 86,150 17,824 13,894 18,237 16,379 89,100 89,150 18,664 14,644 19,077 17,129 92,100 92,150 19,504 15,394 19,917 17,879
86,150 86,200 17,838 13,906 18,251 16,391 89,150 89,200 18,678 14,656 19,091 17,141 92,150 92,200 19,518 15,406 19,931 17,891
86,200 86,250 17,852 13,919 18,265 16,404 89,200 89,250 18,692 14,669 19,105 17,154 92,200 92,250 19,532 15,419 19,945 17,904
86,250 86,300 17,866 13,931 18,279 16,416 89,250 89,300 18,706 14,681 19,119 17,166 92,250 92,300 19,546 15,431 19,959 17,916
86,300 86,350 17,880 13,944 18,293 16,429 89,300 89,350 18,720 14,694 19,133 17,179 92,300 92,350 19,560 15,444 19,973 17,929
86,350 86,400 17,894 13,956 18,307 16,441 89,350 89,400 18,734 14,706 19,147 17,191 92,350 92,400 19,574 15,456 19,987 17,941
86,400 86,450 17,908 13,969 18,321 16,454 89,400 89,450 18,748 14,719 19,161 17,204 92,400 92,450 19,588 15,469 20,001 17,954
86,450 86,500 17,922 13,981 18,335 16,466 89,450 89,500 18,762 14,731 19,175 17,216 92,450 92,500 19,602 15,481 20,015 17,966
86,500 86,550 17,936 13,994 18,349 16,479 89,500 89,550 18,776 14,744 19,189 17,229 92,500 92,550 19,616 15,494 20,029 17,979
86,550 86,600 17,950 14,006 18,363 16,491 89,550 89,600 18,790 14,756 19,203 17,241 92,550 92,600 19,630 15,506 20,043 17,991
86,600 86,650 17,964 14,019 18,377 16,504 89,600 89,650 18,804 14,769 19,217 17,254 92,600 92,650 19,644 15,519 20,057 18,004
86,650 86,700 17,978 14,031 18,391 16,516 89,650 89,700 18,818 14,781 19,231 17,266 92,650 92,700 19,658 15,531 20,071 18,016
86,700 86,750 17,992 14,044 18,405 16,529 89,700 89,750 18,832 14,794 19,245 17,279 92,700 92,750 19,672 15,544 20,085 18,029
86,750 86,800 18,006 14,056 18,419 16,541 89,750 89,800 18,846 14,806 19,259 17,291 92,750 92,800 19,686 15,556 20,099 18,041
86,800 86,850 18,020 14,069 18,433 16,554 89,800 89,850 18,860 14,819 19,273 17,304 92,800 92,850 19,700 15,569 20,113 18,054
86,850 86,900 18,034 14,081 18,447 16,566 89,850 89,900 18,874 14,831 19,287 17,316 92,850 92,900 19,714 15,581 20,127 18,066
86,900 86,950 18,048 14,094 18,461 16,579 89,900 89,950 18,888 14,844 19,301 17,329 92,900 92,950 19,728 15,594 20,141 18,079
86,950 87,000 18,062 14,106 18,475 16,591 89,950 90,000 18,902 14,856 19,315 17,341 92,950 93,000 19,742 15,606 20,155 18,091
87,000 90,000 93,000
87,000 87,050 18,076 14,119 18,489 16,604 90,000 90,050 18,916 14,869 19,329 17,354 93,000 93,050 19,756 15,619 20,169 18,104
87,050 87,100 18,090 14,131 18,503 16,616 90,050 90,100 18,930 14,881 19,343 17,366 93,050 93,100 19,770 15,631 20,183 18,116
87,100 87,150 18,104 14,144 18,517 16,629 90,100 90,150 18,944 14,894 19,357 17,379 93,100 93,150 19,784 15,644 20,197 18,129
87,150 87,200 18,118 14,156 18,531 16,641 90,150 90,200 18,958 14,906 19,371 17,391 93,150 93,200 19,798 15,656 20,211 18,141
87,200 87,250 18,132 14,169 18,545 16,654 90,200 90,250 18,972 14,919 19,385 17,404 93,200 93,250 19,812 15,669 20,225 18,154
87,250 87,300 18,146 14,181 18,559 16,666 90,250 90,300 18,986 14,931 19,399 17,416 93,250 93,300 19,826 15,681 20,239 18,166
87,300 87,350 18,160 14,194 18,573 16,679 90,300 90,350 19,000 14,944 19,413 17,429 93,300 93,350 19,840 15,694 20,253 18,179
87,350 87,400 18,174 14,206 18,587 16,691 90,350 90,400 19,014 14,956 19,427 17,441 93,350 93,400 19,854 15,706 20,267 18,191
87,400 87,450 18,188 14,219 18,601 16,704 90,400 90,450 19,028 14,969 19,441 17,454 93,400 93,450 19,868 15,719 20,281 18,204
87,450 87,500 18,202 14,231 18,615 16,716 90,450 90,500 19,042 14,981 19,455 17,466 93,450 93,500 19,882 15,731 20,295 18,216
87,500 87,550 18,216 14,244 18,629 16,729 90,500 90,550 19,056 14,994 19,469 17,479 93,500 93,550 19,896 15,744 20,309 18,229
87,550 87,600 18,230 14,256 18,643 16,741 90,550 90,600 19,070 15,006 19,483 17,491 93,550 93,600 19,910 15,756 20,323 18,241
87,600 87,650 18,244 14,269 18,657 16,754 90,600 90,650 19,084 15,019 19,497 17,504 93,600 93,650 19,924 15,769 20,337 18,254
87,650 87,700 18,258 14,281 18,671 16,766 90,650 90,700 19,098 15,031 19,511 17,516 93,650 93,700 19,938 15,781 20,351 18,266
87,700 87,750 18,272 14,294 18,685 16,779 90,700 90,750 19,112 15,044 19,525 17,529 93,700 93,750 19,952 15,794 20,365 18,279
87,750 87,800 18,286 14,306 18,699 16,791 90,750 90,800 19,126 15,056 19,539 17,541 93,750 93,800 19,966 15,806 20,379 18,291
87,800 87,850 18,300 14,319 18,713 16,804 90,800 90,850 19,140 15,069 19,553 17,554 93,800 93,850 19,980 15,819 20,393 18,304
87,850 87,900 18,314 14,331 18,727 16,816 90,850 90,900 19,154 15,081 19,567 17,566 93,850 93,900 19,994 15,831 20,407 18,316
87,900 87,950 18,328 14,344 18,741 16,829 90,900 90,950 19,168 15,094 19,581 17,579 93,900 93,950 20,008 15,844 20,421 18,329
87,950 88,000 18,342 14,356 18,755 16,841 90,950 91,000 19,182 15,106 19,595 17,591 93,950 94,000 20,022 15,856 20,435 18,341
88,000 91,000 94,000
88,000 88,050 18,356 14,369 18,769 16,854 91,000 91,050 19,196 15,119 19,609 17,604 94,000 94,050 20,036 15,869 20,449 18,354
88,050 88,100 18,370 14,381 18,783 16,866 91,050 91,100 19,210 15,131 19,623 17,616 94,050 94,100 20,050 15,881 20,463 18,366
88,100 88,150 18,384 14,394 18,797 16,879 91,100 91,150 19,224 15,144 19,637 17,629 94,100 94,150 20,064 15,894 20,477 18,379
88,150 88,200 18,398 14,406 18,811 16,891 91,150 91,200 19,238 15,156 19,651 17,641 94,150 94,200 20,078 15,906 20,491 18,391
88,200 88,250 18,412 14,419 18,825 16,904 91,200 91,250 19,252 15,169 19,665 17,654 94,200 94,250 20,092 15,919 20,505 18,404
88,250 88,300 18,426 14,431 18,839 16,916 91,250 91,300 19,266 15,181 19,679 17,666 94,250 94,300 20,106 15,931 20,519 18,416
88,300 88,350 18,440 14,444 18,853 16,929 91,300 91,350 19,280 15,194 19,693 17,679 94,300 94,350 20,120 15,944 20,533 18,429
88,350 88,400 18,454 14,456 18,867 16,941 91,350 91,400 19,294 15,206 19,707 17,691 94,350 94,400 20,134 15,956 20,547 18,441
88,400 88,450 18,468 14,469 18,881 16,954 91,400 91,450 19,308 15,219 19,721 17,704 94,400 94,450 20,148 15,969 20,561 18,454
88,450 88,500 18,482 14,481 18,895 16,966 91,450 91,500 19,322 15,231 19,735 17,716 94,450 94,500 20,162 15,981 20,575 18,466
88,500 88,550 18,496 14,494 18,909 16,979 91,500 91,550 19,336 15,244 19,749 17,729 94,500 94,550 20,176 15,994 20,589 18,479
88,550 88,600 18,510 14,506 18,923 16,991 91,550 91,600 19,350 15,256 19,763 17,741 94,550 94,600 20,190 16,006 20,603 18,491
88,600 88,650 18,524 14,519 18,937 17,004 91,600 91,650 19,364 15,269 19,777 17,754 94,600 94,650 20,204 16,019 20,617 18,504
88,650 88,700 18,538 14,531 18,951 17,016 91,650 91,700 19,378 15,281 19,791 17,766 94,650 94,700 20,218 16,031 20,631 18,516
88,700 88,750 18,552 14,544 18,965 17,029 91,700 91,750 19,392 15,294 19,805 17,779 94,700 94,750 20,232 16,044 20,645 18,529
88,750 88,800 18,566 14,556 18,979 17,041 91,750 91,800 19,406 15,306 19,819 17,791 94,750 94,800 20,246 16,056 20,659 18,541
88,800 88,850 18,580 14,569 18,993 17,054 91,800 91,850 19,420 15,319 19,833 17,804 94,800 94,850 20,260 16,069 20,673 18,554
88,850 88,900 18,594 14,581 19,007 17,066 91,850 91,900 19,434 15,331 19,847 17,816 94,850 94,900 20,274 16,081 20,687 18,566
88,900 88,950 18,608 14,594 19,021 17,079 91,900 91,950 19,448 15,344 19,861 17,829 94,900 94,950 20,288 16,094 20,701 18,579
88,950 89,000 18,622 14,606 19,035 17,091 91,950 92,000 19,462 15,356 19,875 17,841 94,950 95,000 20,302 16,106 20,715 18,591
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on next page)
- 264 -

Page 267 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
95,000 98,000
95,000 95,050 20,316 16,119 20,729 18,604 98,000 98,050 21,156 16,869 21,569 19,354
95,050 95,100 20,330 16,131 20,743 18,616 98,050 98,100 21,170 16,881 21,583 19,366
95,100 95,150 20,344 16,144 20,757 18,629 98,100 98,150 21,184 16,894 21,597 19,379
95,150 95,200 20,358 16,156 20,771 18,641 98,150 98,200 21,198 16,906 21,611 19,391
95,200 95,250 20,372 16,169 20,785 18,654 98,200 98,250 21,212 16,919 21,625 19,404
95,250 95,300 20,386 16,181 20,799 18,666 98,250 98,300 21,226 16,931 21,639 19,416
95,300 95,350 20,400 16,194 20,813 18,679 98,300 98,350 21,240 16,944 21,653 19,429
95,350 95,400 20,414 16,206 20,827 18,691 98,350 98,400 21,254 16,956 21,667 19,441
95,400 95,450 20,428 16,219 20,841 18,704 98,400 98,450 21,268 16,969 21,681 19,454
95,450 95,500 20,442 16,231 20,855 18,716 98,450 98,500 21,282 16,981 21,695 19,466
95,500 95,550 20,456 16,244 20,869 18,729 98,500 98,550 21,296 16,994 21,709 19,479
95,550 95,600 20,470 16,256 20,883 18,741 98,550 98,600 21,310 17,006 21,723 19,491
95,600 95,650 20,484 16,269 20,897 18,754 98,600 98,650 21,324 17,019 21,737 19,504
95,650 95,700 20,498 16,281 20,911 18,766 98,650 98,700 21,338 17,031 21,751 19,516
95,700 95,750 20,512 16,294 20,925 18,779 98,700 98,750 21,352 17,044 21,765 19,529
95,750 95,800 20,526 16,306 20,939 18,791 98,750 98,800 21,366 17,056 21,779 19,541
95,800 95,850 20,540 16,319 20,953 18,804 98,800 98,850 21,380 17,069 21,793 19,554
95,850 95,900 20,554 16,331 20,967 18,816 98,850 98,900 21,394 17,081 21,807 19,566
95,900 95,950 20,568 16,344 20,981 18,829 98,900 98,950 21,408 17,094 21,821 19,579
95,950 96,000 20,582 16,356 20,995 18,841 98,950 99,000 21,422 17,106 21,835 19,591
96,000 99,000
96,000 96,050 20,596 16,369 21,009 18,854 99,000 99,050 21,436 17,119 21,849 19,604
96,050 96,100 20,610 16,381 21,023 18,866 99,050 99,100 21,450 17,131 21,863 19,616
96,100 96,150 20,624 16,394 21,037 18,879 99,100 99,150 21,464 17,144 21,877 19,629
96,150 96,200 20,638 16,406 21,051 18,891 99,150 99,200 21,478 17,156 21,891 19,641
96,200 96,250 20,652 16,419 21,065 18,904 99,200 99,250 21,492 17,169 21,905 19,654
96,250 96,300 20,666 16,431 21,079 18,916 99,250 99,300 21,506 17,181 21,919 19,666
96,300 96,350 20,680 16,444 21,093 18,929 99,300 99,350 21,520 17,194 21,933 19,679
96,350 96,400 20,694 16,456 21,107 18,941 99,350 99,400 21,534 17,206 21,947 19,691
96,400 96,450 20,708 16,469 21,121 18,954 99,400 99,450 21,548 17,219 21,961 19,704
96,450 96,500 20,722 16,481 21,135 18,966 99,450 99,500 21,562 17,231 21,975 19,716
96,500 96,550 20,736 16,494 21,149 18,979 99,500 99,550 21,576 17,244 21,989 19,729
96,550 96,600 20,750 16,506 21,163 18,991 99,550 99,600 21,590 17,256 22,003 19,741
96,600 96,650 20,764 16,519 21,177 19,004 99,600 99,650 21,604 17,269 22,017 19,754
96,650 96,700 20,778 16,531 21,191 19,016 99,650 99,700 21,618 17,281 22,031 19,766
96,700 96,750 20,792 16,544 21,205 19,029 99,700 99,750 21,632 17,294 22,045 19,779
96,750 96,800 20,806 16,556 21,219 19,041 99,750 99,800 21,646 17,306 22,059 19,791
96,800 96,850 20,820 16,569 21,233 19,054 99,800 99,850 21,660 17,319 22,073 19,804
96,850 96,900 20,834 16,581 21,247 19,066 99,850 99,900 21,674 17,331 22,087 19,816
96,900 96,950 20,848 16,594 21,261 19,079 99,900 99,950 21,688 17,344 22,101 19,829
96,950 97,000 20,862 16,606 21,275 19,091 99,950 100,000 21,702 17,356 22,115 19,841
97,000
97,000 97,050 20,876 16,619 21,289 19,104
97,050 97,100 20,890 16,631 21,303 19,116
97,100 97,150 20,904 16,644 21,317 19,129
97,150 97,200 20,918 16,656 21,331 19,141
97,200 97,250 20,932 16,669 21,345 19,154
97,250 97,300 20,946 16,681 21,359 19,166
97,300 97,350 20,960 16,694 21,373 19,179 $100,000
or over Ð97,350 97,400 20,974 16,706 21,387 19,191 use the Tax97,400 97,450 20,988 16,719 21,401 19,204 Computation97,450 97,500 21,002 16,731 21,415 19,216 Worksheet97,500 97,550 21,016 16,744 21,429 19,229 on page 26697,550 97,600 21,030 16,756 21,443 19,241
97,600 97,650 21,044 16,769 21,457 19,254
97,650 97,700 21,058 16,781 21,471 19,266
97,700 97,750 21,072 16,794 21,485 19,279
97,750 97,800 21,086 16,806 21,499 19,291
97,800 97,850 21,100 16,819 21,513 19,304
97,850 97,900 21,114 16,831 21,527 19,316
97,900 97,950 21,128 16,844 21,541 19,329
97,950 98,000 21,142 16,856 21,555 19,341
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er)
- 265 -

CAUTION
!
Page 268 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010 Tax Computation WorksheetÐLine 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section AÐUse if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$171,850  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 6,290.75  $
Over $171,850 but not over
$373,650  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 14,883.25  $
Over $373,650  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 22,356.25  $
Section BÐUse if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you. 
Tax. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) Subtract (d) from (c).
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction Enter the result here and
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$137,300  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 7,637.50  $
Over $137,300 but not over
$209,250  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 11,756.50  $
Over $209,250 but not over
$373,650  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 22,219.00  $
Over $373,650  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 29,692.00  $
Section CÐUse if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$104,625  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 5,878.25  $
At least $104,625 but not over
$186,825  $  ×  33% (.33)  $ $ 11,109.50  $
Over $186,825  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 14,846.00  $
Section DÐUse if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$117,650  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 5,152.50  $
Over $117,650 but not over
$190,550  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $  8,682.00  $
Over $190,550 but not over
$373,650  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 18,209.50  $
Over $373,650  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 25,682.50  $
Page 266 Publication 17 (2010)

Page 269 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Table Cat. 24811v52t
2010
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
8,375
34,000
82,400
171,850
373,650
$8,375
34,000
82,400
171,850
373,650
$0
8,375
34,000
82,400
171,850
373,650
$0
16,750
68,000
137,300
209,250
373,650
$0
8,375
34,000
68,650
104,625
186,825
$0
11,950
45,550
117,650
190,550
373,650
$16,750
68,000
137,300
209,250
373,650
$8,375
34,000
68,650
104,625
186,825
$11,950
45,550
117,650
190,550
373,650
$0
16,750
68,000
137,300
209,250
373,650
$0
8,375
34,000
68,650
104,625
186,825
$0
11,950
45,550
117,650
190,550
373,650
10%
$837.50 + 15%
4,681.25 + 25%
16,781.25 + 28%
41,827.25 + 33%
108,421.25 + 35%
10%
$1,675.00 + 15%
9,362.50 + 25%
26,687.50 + 28%
46,833.50 + 33%
101,085.50 + 35%
10%
$837.50 + 15%
4,681.25 + 25%
13,343.75 + 28%
23,416.75 + 33%
50,542.75 + 35%
10%
$1,195.00 + 15%
6,236.00 + 25%
24,260.00 + 28%
44,672.00 + 33%
105,095.00 + 35%
Publication 17 (2010) Page 267

Page 270 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your amount of your tax liability or cer- our examiner proposes any Your collection appeal rights are
most important rights as a tax- tain collection actions, you have changes to your return, he or she explained in detail in Publication
payer, including the examination, the right to ask the Appeals Office will explain the reasons for the 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
appeal, collection, and refund to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree with Innocent spouse relief. Gener-processes. ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet with ally, both you and your spouse arethe examiner's supervisor.Relief from certain penalties and each responsible for paying the full
interest. The IRS will waive pen- Repeat examinations. If we ex- amount of any tax, interest, and
alties when allowed by law if you amined your return for the same penalties due on your joint return.
can show you acted reasonably items in either of the 2 previous However, if you qualify for innocentDeclaration of Taxpayer and in good faith or relied on the years and proposed no change to spouse relief, you may be relievedRights incorrect advice of an IRS em- your tax liability, please contact us of all or part of the joint liability. To
ployee. We will waive interest that as soon as possible so we can see request relief, you must file Form
Protection of your rights. IRS is the result of certain errors or de- if we should discontinue the exami- 8857, Request for Innocent
employees will explain and protect lays caused by an IRS employee. nation. Spouse Relief, no later than 2
your rights as a taxpayer through- years after the date on which the
out your contact with us. IRS first attempted to collect the tax
from you. For example, the 2-yearExaminations (Audits) AppealsPrivacy and confidentiality. period for filing your claim may startThe IRS will not disclose to anyone We accept most taxpayers' returns If you do not agree with the exam- if the IRS applies your tax refundthe information you give us, except as filed. If we inquire about your iner's proposed changes, you can from 1 year to the taxes that youas authorized by law. You have the return or select it for examination, it appeal them to the Appeals Office and your spouse owe for anotherright to know why we are asking does not suggest that you are dis- of IRS. Most differences can be year. For more information on inno-you for information, how we will use honest. The inquiry or examination settled without expensive and cent spouse relief, see Publicationit, and what will happen if you do may or may not result in more tax. time-consuming court trials. Your 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, andnot provide requested information. We may close your case without appeal rights are explained in detail Form 8857.change or you may receive a re- in both Publication 5, Your AppealProfessional and courteous
fund. Rights and How To Prepare a Pro-service. If you believe that an
The process of selecting a re- test If You Don't Agree, and Publi-IRS employee has not treated you Potential Third Partyturn for examination usually begins cation 556, Examination ofin a professional, fair, and courte- Contactsin one of two ways. First, we use Returns, Appeal Rights, andous manner, you should tell that
computer programs to identify re- Claims for Refund.employee's supervisor. If the su- Generally, the IRS will deal directly
turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use thepervisor's response is not satisfac- with you or your duly authorized
amounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itstory, you should write to the IRS representative. However, we
based on information returns, such findings, you may be able to takedirector for your area or the center sometimes talk with other persons
as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies your case to the U.S. Tax Court,where you filed your return. if we need information that you
of past examinations, or on certain U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or have been unable to provide, or toRepresentation. You may either issues identified by compliance the U.S. District Court where you verify information we have re-represent yourself or, with proper projects. Second, we use informa- live. If you take your case to court, ceived. If we do contact other per-written authorization, have some- tion from outside sources that indi- the IRS will have the burden of sons, such as a neighbor, bank,one else represent you in your cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad- employer, or employees, we willplace. Your representative must be incorrect amounts. These sources equate records to show your tax generally need to tell them limiteda person allowed to practice before may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS, information, such as your name.the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- records, and individuals. If we de- and meet certain other conditions. The law prohibits us from disclos-fied public accountant, or enrolled termine that the information is ac- If the court agrees with you on most ing any more information than isagent. If you are in an interview and curate and reliable, we may use it issues in your case and finds that necessary to obtain or verify theask to consult such a person, then to select a return for examination. our position was largely unjustified, information we are seeking. Ourwe must stop and reschedule the Publication 556, Examination of you may be able to recover some of need to contact other persons mayinterview in most cases. Returns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigation continue as long as there is activityYou can have someone accom- Claims for Refund, explains the costs. You will not be eligible to in your case. If we do contact otherpany you at an interview. You may rules and procedures that we follow recover these costs unless you persons, you have a right to re-make sound recordings of any in examinations. The following sec- tried to resolve your case adminis- quest a list of those contacted.meetings with our examination, ap- tions give an overview of how we tratively, including going throughpeal, or collection personnel, pro- conduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavevided you tell us in writing 10 days us the information necessary to re- RefundsBy mail. We handle many exami-before the meeting. solve the case.nations and inquiries by mail. We You may file a claim for refund ifPayment of only the correct will send you a letter with either a you think you paid too much tax.amount of tax. You are respon- request for more information or a You must generally file the claimCollectionssible for paying only the correct reason why we believe a change to within 3 years from the date youamount of tax due under the lawÐ your return may be needed. You Publication 594, The IRS Collec- filed your original return or 2 yearsno more, no less. If you cannot pay can respond by mail or you can tion Process, explains your rights from the date you paid the tax,all of your tax when it is due, you request a personal interview with and responsibilities regarding pay- whichever is later. The law gener-may be able to make monthly in- an examiner. If you mail us the re- ment of federal taxes. It describes: ally provides for interest on yourstallment payments. quested information or provide an refund if it is not paid within 45 days• What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may notHelp with unresolved tax of the date you filed your return ortaxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explainproblems. The Taxpayer Advo- claim for refund. Publication 556if you get a tax bill and whatthe reasons for any changes.cate Service can help you if you has more information on refunds.to do if you think your bill isPlease do not hesitate to write to ushave tried unsuccessfully to re- If you were due a refund but youwrong. It also covers makingabout anything you do not under-solve a problem with the IRS. Your did not file a return, you generallyinstallment payments, delay-stand.local Taxpayer Advocate can offer must file within 3 years from theing collection action, and sub-you special help if you have a sig- date the return was due (includingBy interview. If we notify you mitting an offer innificant hardship as a result of a tax extensions) to get that refund.that we will conduct your examina- compromise.problem. For more information, see tion through a personal interview,Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- • IRS collection actions. It cov-or you request such an interview,cate under How To Get Tax Help. ers liens, releasing a lien, le-you have the right to ask that the vies, releasing a levy,examination take place at a rea-Appeals and judicial review. If seizures and sales, and re-sonable time and place that is con-you disagree with us about the lease of property.venient for both you and the IRS. If
■
Page 268 Publication 17 (2010)

Page 271 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics click on Where's My Refund. • TTY/TDD equipment. If youYou can get help with unresolved (LITCs). The Low Income Tax- Wait at least 72 hours after have access to TTY/TDDtax issues, order free publications payer Clinic program serves indi- the IRS acknowledges receipt equipment, calland forms, ask tax questions, and viduals who have a problem with of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 1-800-829-4059 to ask taxget information from the IRS in sev- the IRS and whose income is below weeks after mailing a paper questions or to order formseral ways. By selecting the method a certain level. LITCs are indepen- return. If you filed Form 8379 and publications.that is best for you, you will have dent from the IRS. Most LITCs can with your return, wait 14quick and easy access to tax help. • TeleTax topics. Callprovide representation before the weeks (11 weeks if you filed 1-800-829-4477 to listen toContacting your Taxpayer Advo- IRS or in court on audits, tax collec- electronically). Have your pre-recorded messages cov-cate. The Taxpayer Advocate tion disputes, and other issues for 2010 tax return available so ering various tax topics.Service (TAS) is an independent free or a small fee. If an individual's you can provide your social
organization within the IRS. We • Refund information. To checknative language is not English, security number, your filing
help taxpayers who are experienc- the status of your 2010 re-some clinics can provide multil- status, and the exact whole
ing economic harm, such as not fund, call 1-800-829-1954 oringual information about taxpayer dollar amount of your refund.
being able to provide necessities 1-800-829-4477 (automatedrights and responsibilities. For • Download forms, includinglike housing, transportation, or refund information 24 hours amore information, see Publication talking tax forms, instructions,food; taxpayers who are seeking day, 7 days a week). Wait at4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic and publications.help in resolving tax problems with least 72 hours after the IRSList. This publication is available at
the IRS; and those who believe that • Order IRS products online. acknowledges receipt of yourIRS.gov, by calling
an IRS system or procedure is not e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks1-800-TAX-FORM • Research your tax questionsworking as it should. Here are after mailing a paper return. If(1-800-829-3676), or at your local online.seven things every taxpayer should you filed Form 8379 with yourIRS office.
• Search publications online byknow about TAS: return, wait 14 weeks (11Free tax services. Publication topic or keyword. weeks if you filed electroni-• The Taxpayer Advocate Serv- 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Serv- cally). Have your 2010 tax re-• Use the online Internal Reve-ice is your voice at the IRS. ices, is your guide to IRS services turn available so you cannue Code, regulations, orand resources. Learn about free• Our service is free, confiden- provide your social securityother official guidance.tax information from the IRS, in-tial, and tailored to meet your number, your filing status,cluding publications, services, and • View Internal Revenue Bulle-needs. and the exact whole dollareducation and assistance pro- tins (IRBs) published in the amount of your refund. If you• You may be eligible for our grams. The publication also has an last few years. check the status of your re-help if you have tried to re- index of over 100 TeleTax topics fund and are not given the• Figure your withholding al-solve your tax problem (recorded tax information) you can date it will be issued, pleaselowances using the withhold-through normal IRS channels listen to on the telephone. The ma- wait until the next weeking calculator online at www.and have gotten nowhere, or jority of the information and serv- before checking back.irs.gov/individuals.you believe an IRS procedure ices listed in this publication are
just isn't working as it should. • Other refund information. Toavailable to you free of charge. If • Determine if Form 6251 must check the status of athere is a fee associated with a be filed by using our Alterna-• We help taxpayers whose prior-year refund or amendedresource or service, it is listed in the tive Minimum Tax (AMT) As-problems are causing finan- return refund, callpublication. sistant.cial difficulty or significant 1-800-829-1040.Accessible versions of IRS pub-cost, including the cost of pro- • Sign up to receive local andlished products are available on re-fessional representation. This national tax news by email. Evaluating the quality of ourquest in a variety of alternativeincludes businesses as well telephone services. To ensureformats for people with disabilities. • Get information on startingas individuals. IRS representatives give accurate,and operating a small busi-Free help with your return. Free• Our employees know the IRS courteous, and professional an-ness.help in preparing your return isand how to navigate it. If you swers, we use several methods toavailable nationwide fromqualify for our help, we'll as- evaluate the quality of our tele-IRS-trained volunteers. The Volun-sign your case to an advocate Phone. Many services phone services. One method is forteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA)who will listen to your prob- are available by phone. a second IRS representative to lis-program is designed to helplem, help you understand ten in on or record random tele-
low-income taxpayers and the Taxwhat needs to be done to re- phone calls. Another is to ask someCounseling for the Elderly (TCE)solve it, and stay with you callers to complete a short surveyprogram is designed to assist tax-every step of the way until • Ordering forms, instructions, at the end of the call.payers age 60 and older with theiryour problem is resolved. and publications. Calltax returns. Many VITA sites offer Walk-in. Many products1-800-TAX-FORM• We have at least one local free electronic filing and all volun- and services are available(1-800-829-3676) to ordertaxpayer advocate in every teers will let you know about credits on a walk-in basis.current-year forms, instruc-
state, the District of Colum- and deductions you may be entitled tions, and publications, andbia, and Puerto Rico. You can to claim. To find the nearest VITA prior-year forms and instruc- • Products. You can walk in tocall your local advocate, or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040. tions. You should receive many post offices, libraries,whose number is in your As part of the TCE program, your order within 10 days. and IRS offices to pick upphone book, in Pub. 1546, AARP offers the Tax-Aide counsel- certain forms, instructions,Taxpayer Advocate Serv- • Asking tax questions. Call theing program. To find the nearest and publications. Some IRSiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, IRS with your tax questions atAARP Tax-Aide site, call offices, libraries, groceryand on our website at www. 1-800-829-1040.1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's stores, copy centers, city andirs.gov/advocate. You can website at • Solving problems. You can county government offices,also call our toll-free line at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. get face-to-face help solving credit unions, and office sup-1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD For more information on these tax problems every business ply stores have a collection of1-800-829-4059. programs, go to IRS.gov and enter day in IRS Taxpayer Assis- products available to printkeyword ªVITAº in the upper• You can learn about your tance Centers. An employee from a CD or photocopy fromright-hand corner.rights and responsibilities as can explain IRS letters, re- reproducible proofs. Also,a taxpayer by visiting our on- quest adjustments to your ac-Internet. You can access some IRS offices and librariesline tax toolkit at www.taxtool- count, or help you set up athe IRS website at have the Internal Revenuekit.irs.gov. You can get payment plan. Call your localIRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 Code, regulations, Internal
updates on hot tax topics by Taxpayer Assistance Centerdays a week to: Revenue Bulletins, and Cu-visiting our YouTube channel for an appointment. To find mulative Bulletins available• E-file your return. Find outat www.youtube.com/tasnta the number, go to www.irs. for research purposes.about commercial tax prepa-and our Facebook page at gov/localcontacts or look inration and e-file services • Services. You can walk in towww.facebook.com/ the phone book under Unitedavailable free to eligible tax- your local Taxpayer Assis-YourVoiceAtIRS, or by follow- States Government, Internalpayers. tance Center every businessing our tweets at www.twitter. Revenue Service. day for personal, face-to-facecom/YourVoiceAtIRS. • Check the status of your 2010 tax help. An employee canrefund. Go to IRS.gov and
Publication 17 (2010) Page 269

Page 272 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explain IRS letters, request in-person appointment at your • Fill-in, print, and save fea-
adjustments to your tax ac- convenience. If you have an Internal Revenue Service tures for most tax forms.
count, or help you set up a ongoing, complex tax account 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway • Internal Revenue Bulletins.payment plan. If you need to problem or a special need, Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
• Toll-free and email technicalresolve a tax problem, have such as a disability, an ap- DVD for tax products. support.questions about how the tax pointment can be requested. You can order Publicationlaw applies to your individual All other issues will be han- • Two releases during the year.1796, IRS Tax Productstax return, or you are more dled without an appointment.
 ± The first release will shipDVD, and obtain:comfortable talking with To find the number of your the beginning of Januarysomeone in person, visit your local office, go to • Current-year forms, instruc- 2011.local Taxpayer Assistance www.irs.gov/localcontacts or tions, and publications. ± The final release will shipCenter where you can spread look in the phone book under the beginning of March 2011.• Prior-year forms, instructions,out your records and talk with United States Government, and publications.an IRS representative Internal Revenue Service. Purchase the DVD from Nationalface-to-face. No appointment • Tax Map: an electronic re- Technical Information Serviceis necessaryÐjust walk in. If search tool and finding aid.Mail. You can send your (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders foryou prefer, you can call your order for forms, instruc- $30 (no handling fee) or call• Tax law frequently askedlocal Center and leave a mes- tions, and publications to 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the
questions.sage requesting an appoint- the address below. You should re- DVD for $30 (plus a $6 handlingment to resolve a tax account • Tax Topics from the IRS tele-ceive a response within 10 days fee).issue. A representative will phone response system.after your request is received.
call you back within 2 busi- • Internal Revenue CodeÐTi-ness days to schedule an tle 26 of the U.S. Code.
■
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Cash method (See Cash method Administrators, estate  (See Age test  (See Qualifying child)
taxpayers) Executors and administrators) Agents  (See also10% tax for early withdrawal from Change of: Adopted child ........ . 26, 31, 35 Fiduciaries) ............... . 102IRA or retirement plan  (See
Depreciation, to deduct Earned income credit ...... . 236 Income paid to .............. . 11Early withdrawal from deferred
unclaimed amount ...... . 70 Signing return .............. . 13Adoption:interest account, subheading: Tax
Accounting periods .......... . 11 ATIN ................... . 12, 214 AGI  (See Adjusted gross incomeon)
Child tax credit (See also Child taxCalendar year ......... . 9, 11, 46 (AGI))10-year tax option ........... . 77
credit) .................. . 225Change in, standard deduction not Agricultural workers  (See591/2 rule .................... . 128 Credit Employer's assistanceallowed ................. . 137 Farmworkers)60 day rule ................. . 125 program ................ . 250Fiscal year .......... . 11, 41, 43 Agriculture  (See Farming)701/2 rule .................... . 122 Credits ................ . 161, 250Fringe benefits ............. . 46 Aircraft:401(k) plans: Married filing separately ... . 21Accrual method taxpayers ... . 12 Charitable gift of, deduction for fairTax treatment of Taking .................. . 250Taxes paid during tax year, market value ............ . 162contributions ............. . 49 Employer assistance ........ . 47deduction of ............. . 146 Airline club dues:403(b) plans: Exception for adoptedAccumulation distribution of Not entertainmentRollovers .......... . 77, 125, 131 child .................... . 141trusts: expenses ............... . 179Exemption for child ........ . 161457 plans  (See Section 457 Tax on .................... . 203 Airplanes, donations of ..... . 162Expenses not deductible:deferred compensation plans) Accuracy-related penalties ... . 18 Airport transportation:Foster care prior to, no529 plans  (See Qualified tuition Acknowledgment ........... . 164 Business-related travelcharitable deduction ... . 160programs) ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery expense ................ . 174No charitable deduction
System): Alaska:for .................... . 161
Rental property: Standard meal allowance ... . 176Foreign child .............. . 250A Alternative minimum tax ... . 71 Medical and dental expenses of Alaska Permanent FundAbandonment of home ...... . 107 adopted child ............ . 141Activities not for profit ....... . 91 dividends .................. . 91Abortion: Taxpayer identification Child's dividends ........... . 156Address ..................... . 15Deductibility as medical number ............... . 12, 35 Income from .............. . 7, 66Change of .................. . 16expense ................ . 142 Taxpayer identification numbers Investment income not toForeign .................... . 15Abroad, citizens traveling or (TINs) .................. . 214 include .................. . 155P.O. box ................... . 15working  (See also Citizens Advance earned income Alaska UnemploymentAdjusted basis ........... . 96-97outside U.S.; Foreign credit ........................ . 7 Compensation Fund ...... . 146Decreases to basis ......... . 96employment) ........ . 6, 50, 177 Filing requirements (Table Alcohol rehabilitation centers:Depreciation ................ . 96Absence, temporary ...... . 26, 31 1-3) ....................... . 7 Deductibility of medicalEasements ................. . 97Accelerated Cost Recovery Age: expense ................ . 142Energy conservation subsidiesSystem (ACRS): Children's investments (See Alcoholic beverages:exclusion ................ . 97Rental property: Children, subheading: IRA prohibited transactionsExamples (Table 13-1) ...... . 96Alternative minimum tax ... . 71 Investment income of child in ....................... . 128Gifts ....................... . 98Accelerated death benefits ... . 87 under age 18)Home sale (See Sale of home) Aliens ...................... . 214Form 1040EZ, taxpayer under 65Accident insurance .......... . 46 Improvements .............. . 96 Dual-status (See Dual-statusmay use ................... . 7Cafeteria plans ............. . 51 taxpayers)Increases to basis .......... . 96 Gross income and filingLong-term care .......... . 46, 52 Filing required ................ . 6Local assessments ......... . 96 requirements (Table 1-1) .... . 4Accidental death benefits .... . 47 Nonresident (See NonresidentSales of property .......... . 100 IRAs:Accidents, car .............. . 166 aliens)Section 179 deduction ....... . 96 Contribution cutoff at ageValue determination ........ . 168 Resident (See Resident aliens)Adjusted gross income (AGI) 70 .................... . 122Willful negligence or intentional Alimony ... . 35, 132-134, 133, 134(See also Deductions) ...... . 134 Distribution prior to ageact as cause ............ . 167 Definition of ............... . 132Charitable contribution deduction 59 .................... . 128Accountable plans for employee Mortgage payments:limit .................... . 163 Distribution required at agereimbursements ...... . 185, 186 Interest deduction ........ . 152Itemized deduction limit .... . 150 70 ................ . 127, 129Accountants: Reporting of income ......... . 91Medical and dental expenses and Pension distributions required atBasis to include fees of ...... . 95 limit of deduction .... . 140, 144 Alternative filing methods:age 701/2 ................. . 80
CPA review courses ....... . 193 Modified (See Modified adjusted Electronic (See E-file)Retirement plan recipients over
Preparers of tax returns ..... . 13 gross income (MAGI)) Alternative minimum taxage 75 ................... . 76
Retirement savings contributionAccounting methods ......... . 11 (AMT) .................... . 203Roth IRAs ............. . 130, 132
credit .................... . 21Accrual method (See Accrual Standard deduction for age 65 or Accelerated depreciation
method taxpayers) Adjustments ................ . 203 older .................... . 137 and ...................... . 71

Page 273 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Antiques  (See Collectibles) Automatic investment services: Tax-exempt obligations:Alternative minimum tax (AMT)
Holding period, determination Bonds ................... . 99Appliances:(Cont.)
of ...................... . 105 Transfers betweenDeterioration and damage, notChild's tax, figuring of ...... . 210
spouses ............. . 98, 102Awards  (See Prizes and awards)casualty loss ............ . 167Exempt-interest dividends ... . 66
Beetles:Filing requirements (Table Away-from-home travel  (SeeAppraisal fees .............. . 197
Damage or destruction to trees1-3) ....................... . 7 Travel and transportationDonated property .......... . 161
and plants, when casualtyexpenses)Incentive stock option ......... . 8 Not deductible as interest ... . 153
loss .................... . 167Nonrefundable credit for prior year Real estate transactions, when
tax ..................... . 248 Beneficiaries  (See also Estaterequired by lender ........ . 96
Payments .................... . 8 beneficiaries; TrustAppraisals: B
beneficiaries) ..... . 63, 78, 91, 92Refundable credit for prior year Casualty or theft losses ..... . 168, Babysitting .................. . 45
tax ..................... . 252 Bequests  (See also Estate169 Back pay, award for .......... . 45
beneficiaries; Gifts;Alternative motor vehicle Archer MSAs ................ . 93 Emotional distress damages under
Inheritance) ........ . 91, 92, 209credit ..................... . 247 Contributions ............... . 47 Title VII of Civil Rights Act of
Bicycle:Amateur sports organizations: Filing requirements (Table 1964 ..................... . 91
Fringe benefit .............. . 49Charitable contributions 1-3) ....................... . 7 Backup withholding .. . 39, 43, 55
to ...................... . 158 Medical expenses paid for Bingo .................. . 158, 161Dividend income ............ . 63
decedent from ........... . 141Ambulance service personnel: Birth control pills ........... . 142Penalties ................... . 40
Not deductible as medicalLife insurance proceeds when Birth of child ................ . 26Bad check penalty ........... . 14
expense ................ . 142death in line of duty ....... . 87 Head of household, qualifyingBad debts:
Armed forces  (See alsoAmended returns  (See also Form person to file as ....... . 23, 24Bank deposit, loss due to bank's
Reservists; Veterans benefits;1040X) .................. . 16, 17 Social security number to beinsolvency or
Veterans' organizations) .... . 158,Itemized deduction, change to obtained ................. . 35bankruptcy .............. . 167
180standard deduction ...... . 139 Birth of dependent ........... . 31Reporting on Schedule D (Form
Combat zone:Standard deduction, change to 1040) ................. . 167 Blackmail:Extension to file return .... . 10itemized deductions ...... . 139 Claim for refund ........ . 17, 105 Losses due to ............. . 167Signing return forAmerican citizens abroad  (See Nonbusiness .............. . 105 Blind persons:spouse ................ . 20also Citizens outside U.S.) ..... . 5 Recovery .................. . 87 Exemption fromDependency allotments ..... . 31Employment (See Foreign Reporting of ............... . 105 withholding ............... . 38Disability pay ............... . 50employment) Short-term capital loss ..... . 105 Guide dogs, deductible as medicalDisability pensions .......... . 51American Indians  (See Indians) When deductible ........... . 105 expense ................ . 142GI Bill benefits .............. . 34American Samoa: Baggage: Impairment-related workMilitary .................... . 197Income from .................. . 5 Business-related travel expenses, deductionMilitary quarters allotments .. . 32 expense ................ . 174 for ...................... . 145Amortization: Naval officers on permanent duty Standard deduction for ..... . 137Balance due ................ . 203Bond premiums, treatment aboard ship ............. . 173of ...................... . 157 Blood banks:Bankruptcy:Permanent duty overseas .. . 173 No charitable deduction for bloodCanceled debt not deemed to beAMT  (See Alternative minimum tax Real estate taxes when receiving donations to ......... . 158, 161income .................. . 86(AMT)) housing allowance ....... . 148, Financial institution's bankruptcy Blue books to determine fairAnnuities  (See also 152 causing deductible loss ... . 167 market value ............. . 162Rollovers) .................. . 77 Rehabilitative program Reporting of ............. . 172Cost computation ........... . 75 Boarding houses ............ . 69payments ................ . 50 Banks:Decedent's unrecovered Boats:Reserves ................. . 189 Automatic investment service,investment in ............. . 13 Charitable gift of, deduction for fairRetirees' pay: determination of holdingEarly distributions from ...... . 79 market value ............ . 162Taxable income .......... . 50 period .................. . 105Deferred annuity Donations of ............... . 162Withholding .............. . 36 IRAs with ................. . 121contracts ............ . 79, 80 Body scan .................. . 142Uniforms .................. . 197 Losses on deposits, whenEstimated tax ............... . 75 Bona fide business purpose:Wages ..................... . 50 casualty losses ...... . 104, 167Exclusion limit .............. . 75 Travel expenses ........... . 175Art works: Reporting of ............. . 172Form 1099-R ............... . 43 Work-related education ..... . 191As capital assets ........... . 103 Money market accounts ..... . 64General Rule: Bonds:Capital gains or losses from sale Bar associations:Annuity starting before Adjusted basis for ........... . 99or trade of ............... . 114 Charitable contributionsNovember 19, 1996 ..... . 76 Amortization of premium .... . 157,Artists, performing  (See to ...................... . 161Nonqualified plans and qualified 199Performing artists)plans for recipients over 75 Bar employees: As capital assets ........... . 103Assessments, local  (See Localyears .................. . 76 Tips (See Tip income) Convertible bonds ......... . 101assessments)Purchased annuities ...... . 75 Bar review courses ......... . 193 Discounted:Assistance  (See Tax help)Survivor's annuity ......... . 80 Bargain sales: Capital gain or loss ...... . 103Guaranteed payments ....... . 76 Assistance, tax  (See Tax help) As charitable Issued at discount .......... . 60IRAs as ................... . 121 Assumption of mortgage ..... . 95 contributions ............ . 163 Market discount bonds ..... . 104Joint return ................. . 75 Fees not included in basis ... . 96 Basis of purchase ........... . 97 Original issue discount ...... . 60Worksheet ............... . 78 Athletic events: Barter income ............... . 85 Redemption of ............. . 100Loans from plan ............ . 75 Charitable contributions, amount Definition of bartering ....... . 85 Retirement of ........... . 78, 100Lump-sum distributions ...... . 77 deductible ............... . 159 Form 1099-B ............ . 43, 85 Sale of ..................... . 60Multiple plan benefits ..... . 74, 75 ATIN (Adoption taxpayer Basis: Savings .................... . 57Partly taxable payments ..... . 75 identification number) ..... . 12 Adjusted basis .............. . 96 Sold at premium, computation ofPurchased annuities ........ . 75 Allocation between business andAt-risk rules: adjusted basis ............ . 99Reporting of ................ . 75 personal use ............. . 95 State or local government,Rental property ............. . 71Retirement annuities (See also Bad debts ................. . 105 tax-exempt .............. . 104Attachment of wages ........ . 11Retirement plans) ......... . 74 Bargain purchases .......... . 97 Tax-exempt ................ . 60Attachments to return ....... . 13Rollovers ................... . 77 Bonds ..................... . 99 Bonuses .............. . 38, 45, 93Attorneys:Sale of .................... . 104 Cost basis ................. . 95 Bookkeeping  (See RecordkeepingBar review courses ........ . 193Gain as ordinary income .. . 75 IRAs for nondeductible requirements)Attorneys' fees ......... . 198, 200Simplified method to calculate contributions ...... . 124, 127 Books to determine fair marketBasis to include ............. . 95tax-free part of annuity Definition of ................ . 95 value ..................... . 168Social security and railroadpayment ................. . 76 Gifts ....................... . 98 Borrowed funds  (See alsoretirement benefits, deductionsSurvivor's annuity ......... . 80 Home sales (See Sale of home) Loans) ................. . 75, 156for ....................... . 84Worksheet for Improvements to real Used for charitable contributions,Title to property, for preparation,computation ............ . 76 estate ................... . 96 deduction for ............ . 163filing, etc. ................ . 95Survivor annuities ........... . 80 Involuntary conversion ...... . 97 Bottled water ............... . 142Audits:Trade of insurance policies and Like-kind exchanges ....... . 101
annuities ................ . 101 Travel expense records .... . 183 Boy Scouts:Other than cost ...... . 97-99, 101
Unrecovered investment .... . 199 Charitable contributionsAuto insurance: Points not to be included .... . 96
to ...................... . 158Withholding ......... . 13, 39, 75 Medical expenses covered by, not Property received for
Breach of contract:Annulled marriages: deductible ............... . 142 services .................. . 97
Damages as income ........ . 91Filing status ................ . 19 Automatic extension of time to Real estate ................. . 95
employment ............... . 196file ........................ . 10 Restricted property .......... . 97Anthrax incidents  (See Terrorist
Stock or stock rights ........ . 65attacks) Form 4868 ................. . 10 Bribes ................... . 91, 200

Page 274 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Brokers: Hobbies, sales from Reporting of ............... . 184 Change of name .......... . 12, 43
collections ............... . 92Form 1099-B ........... . 43, 100 Table 26-3 showing forms to be Chaplains:
used .................. . 187Holding period, determinationIRAs with ................. . 121 Life insurance proceeds when
of ...................... . 104 Sale, trade-in, or otherCommissions ........ . 121, 122 death in line of duty ....... . 87
disposition .............. . 182How to report .............. . 112Receiving dividends, reporting on Charitable
Section 179 deductions ..... . 182Form 1099-MISC ......... . 63 Installment sales and ....... . 113 contributions ......... . 157-166
Work-related education,Lump-sum distributions fromBurglary: $500 or more noncash
transportation for ........ . 193pensions and annuities .... . 77Losses due to ............. . 167 contribution:
Mutual funds paying ......... . 65 Cash: Form 8283 to be used .... . 166Burial expenses  (See Funerals)
Net capital gain ... . 103, 113, 114 Dividends paid as ........... . 63 Bargain sales as ........... . 163Business associates  (See also
Included as investment Rebates ................... . 91 Benefit received as result ofEntertainment expenses) ... . 175,
income ............... . 155 Sales of property for ....... . 101 contribution ......... . 158, 161177
Net long-term capital loss ... . 113 Capital gain property asCash contributions, records toBusiness travel to meet ..... . 180
donation ................ . 163Sale of personal items ....... . 93 keep ...................... . 164Travel expenses of, paying
Limit on deduction ... . 163, 164Sale or trade of property heldfor ...................... . 175 Cash method taxpayers ...... . 11
Carryover of excessmore than 1 year .... . 104, 113 Bad debts ................. . 105Business expenses  (See also deduction ............... . 164Schedule D ............... . 112 Points, deduction of ........ . 152Entertainment expenses) ... . 175, Deductions:Section 1250 gains from sale of Real estate transactions, tax177 30% limit of adjusted grossreal property ........ . 103, 114 allocation ............... . 147Job search expenses ....... . 93 income ............... . 163State or local government bonds, Taxes paid during tax year,Meal expenses (See Meal and 50% limit of adjusted grosstax-exempt .............. . 104 deduction of ............. . 146lodging expenses) income ............... . 163Tax rates .................. . 114 Worthless securities andReimbursements ........ . 38, 45 Examples of (TableMaximum capital gain rates negotiable promissoryReturning excess for business 24-1) ................. . 157(Table 16-1) ........... . 114 notes ................... . 100expenses .......... . 38, 187 Limits on ............ . 158, 163Total net gain .............. . 113Travel (See Travel and Cash rebates ................ . 91 Year to claimTotal net loss .............. . 113transportation expenses) Casualties .................. . 111 deduction ............. . 163Undistributed gains ........ . 113Work-related education ..... . 193 Casualty insurance: Definition of ............... . 157Credit for tax on ...... . 65, 250Business organizations: Premiums not in property Fair market value of propertyCar expenses ............... . 166Charitable contributions basis .................... . 96 contributions ... . 158, 162, 163to ...................... . 161 Car pools ................ . 91, 181 Reimbursements from ....... . 91 RecordkeepingBusiness property: Carrybacks: Casualty losses .... . 166-172, 197, requirements .......... . 165As gift, adjusted basis for .... . 98 Business tax credit 199 Gifts to reduce public debt ... . 15Basis for depreciation ....... . 99 carrybacks ............... . 17 Adjusted basis in property ... . 96, Large quantities of items ... . 163Property use changed to, adjusted 97, 169, 172Carryovers: Noncash contributions,basis for ................. . 99 Amount of loss ............ . 168Capital loss ........... . 113, 114 recordkeepingSales or exchanges: Appraisals ............. . 168, 169Worksheet .............. . 114 requirements ............ . 165Like-kind exchanges ..... . 101 Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sCharitable contributions, when Nonqualifiedinsolvency orBusiness tax credits: deduction exceeds organizations ............ . 161bankruptcy .............. . 167Claim for refund ............ . 17 adjusted-gross-income Not deductible ............. . 161
Costs:limits ................... . 164Business use of home ...... . 196 Ordinary income property as
Cleaning up or makingInvestment interest ......... . 155 donation ................ . 163
repairs ................ . 168Cars  (See also Standard mileage Property contributions ...... . 161
Photographs andrates; Travel and Decreased in value ...... . 163C appraisals ............. . 169transportation) ...... . 48, 93, 172, Increased in value ....... . 163Cafeteria plans .............. . 51 Deductible losses .......... . 166181 Publication 78, list of qualifiedCalendar year taxpayers: $100 rule ............... . 171Accidents resulting in casualty organizations ............ . 157Accounting periods .... . 9, 11, 46 When to take (Tableloss .................... . 166 Qualified organizations ..... . 157Filing due date ................ . 9 25-2) ................. . 171Value determination ...... . 168 Types of ................ . 158California Nonoccupational Deduction limits ........... . 171 Written statement from ... . 159Willful negligence or intentionalDisability Benefit Fund .... . 146 For personal property (Table Schedule A (Form 1040) to beact as cause .......... . 167Campaign contributions ..... . 91, 25-1) ................. . 170 used for deductions ...... . 166Actual expenses ....... . 181, 182158, 161 Definition of casualty ....... . 166 Time of making contribution, howAdvertising displays on ..... . 181Presidential Election Campaign Disasters (See also Disaster to determine ............. . 163Allowances fromFund .................... . 12 relief) ................... . 169 To individuals, notemployers ............... . 185Campaign expenses ........ . 200 Employer's emergency disaster deductible ........... . 158, 161As capital assets ........... . 103Canada: fund .................... . 169 Token items given byBlue book to determine fair marketContributions to charitable Fair market value of recipients ............... . 159value ................... . 162organizations in ...... . 158, 161 property ................. . 168 Volunteers, deductibility ofBooks to determine fair marketResident of .............. . 26, 30 Form 4684 to be filed ...... . 166 contributions (Tablevalue ................... . 168Cancellation of Debt ......... . 85 Insurance proceeds, treatment 24-2) ................... . 159Business and personal use,Exceptions to treatment as of ...................... . 169 Charitable deduction for livingallocation between ....... . 182,income .................. . 86 Net operating losses ....... . 172 expenses ................. . 164183Form 1099-C ............... . 43 Nondeductible losses ...... . 166 Charity benefit events:Business-related travel Proof of loss ............... . 167Candidates for public office: Deduction amount for charitableexpenses ............... . 174 Property used partly for businessContributions to, no charitable contributions ............ . 159Car pools ................. . 181 and partly for personaldeduction for ........ . 158, 161 Checklists:Charitable gift of, deduction for fair purposes ................ . 171Capital assets: Medical and dental expensemarket value ............ . 162 Reimbursement ............ . 169Coal and iron ore ........... . 89 deductions (TableCharitable organization service, Reporting of gain or loss .... . 171,Definition of ............... . 103 21-1) ................... . 143use for .................. . 160 172Capital expenses ............ . 32 Checks:Depreciation ............... . 182 Single casualty on multiple As charitableCapital gains or losses ...... . 103, Donations of ............... . 162 properties ............... . 170 contributions ............ . 163106, 112, 115 Electric vehicles (See Electric Cell phone .................. . 196 Canceled checks as evidence ofBad debts as short-term capital cars)
Cemeteries: travel expenses .......... . 183loss .................... . 105 Fixed and variable rate Charitable contributions Constructive receipt of ...... . 11Carryover of ........... . 113, 114 (FAVR) ................. . 186 to ...................... . 158 Payment of tax ............. . 14Worksheet .............. . 114 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill
Certificate, mortgage Penalty if not honored ....... . 14Character of gain .......... . 103 out ..................... . 188
credit ..................... . 248 Check-writing fees .......... . 200Character of loss .......... . 103 Hauling tools or
Certificates of deposit (CDs)  (Seeinstruments ............. . 181Child's distributions and dividends, Child:
also Individual retirementreporting of .......... . 156, 206 Foster child ........... . 240, 241Interest on loans, not
arrangements (IRAs)) ... . 61, 120 Married child .............. . 238deductible ............... . 156Collectibles ................ . 114
Chambers of commerce:Leased vehicles ........... . 182Deductions ................ . 114 Child and dependent care
Charitable contributionsLimit on ................. . 114 Medical transportation ...... . 142, credit ........................ . 8
to .................. . 158, 161143Married filing separately ... . 21 Due diligence .............. . 216
Entertainment expenses forDistributions ................ . 65 Parking (See Parking fees) Earned income ............ . 214
attending meetings ...... . 179Form 1040 or 1040A to be Personal property taxes on, Full-time student ........... . 214
used ............ . 7, 8, 66, 113 deduction of ............. . 149 Change of address ........... . 16 Married filing separately ..... . 21

Page 275 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment income of child under Closing costs: Rounding off dollars ......... . 12Child and dependent care credit
age 18: Real property transactions ... . 95 Computer .................. . 196(Cont.)
Dependent filing requirements Sale of home .............. . 108Payments to relatives ...... . 215 Condemnation of
(Table 1-2) ............... . 5 Clothing: property .............. . 111, 166Child born alive .............. . 26
Interest and dividends .... . 6, 8 Military .................... . 197 Basis computation .......... . 97Child care: Parents' election to report on Moth damage, not casualty Disaster areas,Babysitting ................. . 45 Form 1040 .......... . 6, 156 loss .................... . 167 government-ordered demolitionCare providers .............. . 45 Kidnapped .............. . 26, 30 Uniforms: of unsafe home .......... . 166Credit (See Child and dependent Net investment income, figuring Charitable organization Period of ownership andcare credit) of ...................... . 209 requiring, deduction for cost use ..................... . 109Expenses .................. . 34 Nontaxable income ........ . 209 and upkeep of ......... . 160 Confidential information:Nursing care for healthy baby, not Property received as gift, income Used clothing, charitabledeductible as medical Privacy Act and paperworkfrom .................... . 209 deduction for fair marketexpense ................ . 142 reduction information ........ . 2value ................... . 162Signing return, parent for Travel expenses and ....... . 183Child custody ................ . 27 work ...................... . 197child ..................... . 13 Constructive receipt ofChild support ................ . 91 Standard deduction for ..... . 137, Club dues and membership fees: income ................. . 11, 61Alimony, difference from .... . 132, 138 Entertainment expenses .... . 179133 Contributions  (See also CampaignStillborn .................... . 26 Coal and iron ore ............ . 89 contributions; CharitableChild support under pre-1985 Support of (See Child support) COBRA Premium contributions) ........... . 15, 91,agreement ................. . 35 Tax credit (See Child tax credit) Assistance ............... . 140 157-166, 158, 161Child tax credit ......... . 7, 8, 25, Tentative tax figured at parent's Coins  (See Collectibles) Nontaxable combat pay .... . 121225-226 tax rate ................. . 210 Collectibles: Political ................... . 200Additional credit ........... . 225 Transporting school As capital assets ........... . 103 Reservist repayments ...... . 121Amount of credit ........... . 225 children .................. . 93 Gains or losses from sale or trade Retirement (See specific type ofClaiming, procedure for ..... . 225 Chronic illness: of ...................... . 114 plan)Form 8812, completed ..... . 225 Accelerated payment of life IRA investment in .......... . 128Limits .................. . 21, 225 Controlled corporations:insurance proceeds (See Collective bargainingModified adjusted gross Nontaxable stock purchaseAccelerated death benefits) agreements ................ . 39income ............... . 225 of ...................... . 101Long-term care (See Long-termMarried filing separately ..... . 21 College professor: Related partycare insurance contracts)Qualifying child ............ . 225 Research expenses ........ . 197 transactions ............. . 102Church employees:Withholding, checking Colleges and universities: Convenience fees ........... . 198Filing requirements (Tableamount ................. . 226 Charitable contributions Conventions:1-3) ....................... . 7Child, qualifying ............. . 26 to ...................... . 158 Delegates:Churches, temples, etc.: 50% limit on deduction ... . 163Childcare: Deduction of unreimbursedCharitable contributions Athletic events, amountCredit ..................... . 212 expenses ............. . 160to ...................... . 158 deductible ............. . 159Provider: Travel expenses ......... . 17750% limit on deduction ... . 163 Education costs (See alsoTaxpayer identification Travel expenses ........... . 177Convention delegates, deduction Qualified tuitionnumber ............... . 216 Work-related education, deductionof unreimbursed programs) ................ . 93Children  (See also of travel expenses for overseasexpenses ............... . 160 Employer-provided educationalAdoption) .............. . 47, 161 conventions ............. . 194Citizen or resident test ....... . 26 assistance (See alsoAdditional credit on child tax Conversion  (See specificCitizens outside U.S.: Educationalcredit ................... . 225 retirement or IRA plan)Business travel outside assistance) ............ . 135Adoption (See Adopted child) Convertible stocks andU.S. .................... . 177 Combat zone:Babysitters ................. . 45 bonds .................... . 101Self-employed persons ... . 177 Extension to file return ...... . 10Birth of child: Cooperative housing:Standard meal Signing return for spouse .... . 20Head of household, qualifying Dwelling unit used asallowance ............. . 176person to file as ..... . 23, 24 Comments on publication ...... . 3 home .................... . 66Earned income exclusion ...... . 2Social security number to be Commission drivers: Mortgage interestEmployment (See Foreignobtained ............... . 35 Deduction of expenses ..... . 184 statements .............. . 155employment)Care providers (See also Child Commissions ................ . 38 Real estate taxes, deductionExtension of time to file ...... . 10care) .................... . 45 Advance ................... . 45 of ...................... . 147Filing requirements ........... . 5Child's tax, figuring of ...... . 210 IRAs with brokers ...... . 121, 122 Taxes that are deductible (TableWithholding from IRAAlternative minimum Property basis to include when 22-1) ................. . 147distributions ............. . 127tax ................... . 210 buyer pays ............... . 95 Sale or trade of:Credit for (See also Child and Civic associations: Sharing of (kickbacks) ....... . 93 Form 1099-S to report .... . 113dependent care credit; Child tax Charitable contributions Unearned, deduction for Period of ownership andcredit) .................. . 7, 8 to ...................... . 161 repayment of ............. . 45 use ................... . 109Custody of ................. . 27 Contributions to, no charitable Commodities: Cooperatives:Death of child: deduction for ............ . 158 Derivative financial Patronage dividends ........ . 66Head of household, qualifying Civil defense organizations: instruments ............. . 103person to file as ..... . 23, 24 Co-owners:Charitable contributions Common law marriage ....... . 19Deductions ................ . 209 Dwelling unit used as home byto ...................... . 158 Communist organizations:Dividends of (See this heading: co-owner, rental income andCivil service retirement Charitable contributionsInvestment income of child expense allocation ........ . 69benefits ................... . 74 to ...................... . 161under age 18) Copyrights ................. . 103Civil suits  (See also Damages from Community property ....... . 5, 58Earnings of ................... . 6 Infringement damages ...... . 91lawsuits) ................... . 91 Alimony, difference from .... . 132Filing requirements ........... . 6 Royalties ................... . 89Civil tax penalties  (See Penalties) IRAs ...................... . 121As dependents (Table Corporations  (See also SMarried filing separately ..... . 21Clergy ......................... . 61-2) ..................... . 5 corporations) ............... . 87Medical and dentalContributions that can be spent asGifts to ................. . 55, 209 Controlled corporations ..... . 101,expenses ............... . 140individual wishes, not deductibleInclusion of child's income on 102charitable contribution .... . 161 Commuting expenses ....... . 181,parents's return (Figure Director fees as self-employmentHousing .................... . 49 20031-A) ................... . 206 income .................. . 92Real estate taxes when Employer-provided commuterIncome, calculation of ...... . 206 Reorganizations and nontaxablereceiving housing vehicle ................... . 48Capital gains trade of stock ............ . 101allowance ......... . 148, 152 Compensation  (See also Wagesdistributions ........... . 206 Corrections  (See Errors)Life insurance proceeds when and salaries) ............... . 45Investment income of .... . 55, 63 Corrosive drywall; damagechaplain died in line of Defined for IRA purposes ... . 121Investment income of certain from ...................... . 166duty ..................... . 87 Defined for Roth IRAchildren ............. . 204, 210 Cosmetic surgery:Pensions ................... . 49 purposes ................ . 130Form 8615, use of (Figure Not deductible as medicalSpecial income rules ........ . 49 Employee .................. . 4531-B) ................. . 207 expense ................ . 142Clerical help, deductibility MiscellaneousInvestment income
Cosmetics:of ........................ . 197 compensation ............ . 45defined ............... . 209
Not deductible as medicalNonemployee .............. . 92Clients  (See also EntertainmentParental information, providing
expense ................ . 142Unemployment ............. . 89expenses) ............. . 175, 177of .................... . 209
Cost basis ................... . 95Business travel to meet ..... . 180Parents' election to report on Computation of tax .......... . 12
Form 1040 ............ . 205 Travel expenses of, paying Equal amounts ............. . 12 IRAs for nondeductible
Trust income ............ . 209 for ...................... . 175 Negative amounts .......... . 13 contributions ........ . 124, 127

Page 276 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost-of-living allowances .... . 46 Nonfundable credits ........ . 247 Deceased taxpayers  (See Union dues (See Labor unions)
Decedents) Work-related education ..... . 193Other than those on Form 1040A,Country clubs:
Form 1040 to be used ....... . 8 Decedents  (See also Executors Deeds:Charitable contributions
Plug-in electric drive motor and administrators) ........... . 5to ...................... . 161 Preparation costs for ....... . 153
vehicle .................. . 249 Capital loss of ............. . 114 Recording fees, basis toDues:
Plug-in electric vehicle ..... . 249 include ................... . 96Deceased spouse ............. . 5Charitable deduction not
Prior year minimum tax (AMT),allowed ........... . 158, 159 Personal exemption ....... . 24 Deferred annuity contracts  (See
nonrefundable ........... . 248Entertainment expense Due dates .................. . 10 Annuities)
Prior year minimum tax (AMT),deduction not Filing requirements ........... . 5 Deferred compensation:
refundable .............. . 252allowed ............... . 179 Funeral expenses .......... . 161 Limit ....................... . 49
Qualified energy conservation Medical and dentalCoupon bonds ............... . 61 Nonqualified plans .......... . 46
bonds (See Credit to holders of expenses ............... . 141Court awards and damages  (See Deferred compensation planstax credit bonds) Savings bonds .............. . 58Damages from lawsuits) (See Retirement plans)
Qualified forestry conservation Spouse's death .......... . 19, 20Cousin ...................... . 31 Delinquent taxes:bonds (See Credit to holders of Standard deduction ........ . 137 Real estate transactions, taxCoverdell ESAs: tax credit bonds) Transfer of property at allocation ............... . 147Additional tax on ........... . 203 Qualified school construction death ................... . 100Filing requirements (Table Delivery services .............. . 9bonds (See Credit to holders of Declaration of rights of taxpayers:1-3) ....................... . 7 Business-related traveltax credit bonds) IRS request for information .... . 2 expense ................ . 174CPAs  (See Accountants) Qualified zone academy bonds Deduction: Demutualization of life insuranceCredit card payment of taxes: (See Credit to holders of tax Costs of discrimination companies ............... . 101Estimated tax ............... . 42 credit bonds) suits ..................... . 91 Dental expenses  (See Medical andCredit cards: Refundable credits ......... . 250 Deductions  (See also Bad debts; dental expenses)Annual fees, not Residential energy ......... . 249 Capital losses; Entertainmentdeductible ............... . 156 Dentures:Retirement savings expenses; Personal exemption; Deductibility as medicalBenefits, taxability of contribution ............. . 249 Points; Recovery of amounts expense ................ . 142insurance ................ . 91 Cremation: previously deducted; StandardCharitable contributions charged Dependent care:Not deductible as medical deduction) ...... . 21, 24, 87, 105,to ...................... . 163 Benefits ............... . 212, 216expense ................ . 142 114, 132, 137, 152, 153, 175, 177Finance charges, not Center .................... . 215Criminal prosecutions: Alimony, deductible bydeductible ............... . 156 Credit for .................. . 212Travel expenses for federal payer ................... . 134Payment of taxes ............. . 2 Dependent taxpayer test ..... . 25staff .................... . 174 Business expenses (See BusinessCredit for child and dependent Dependents  (See also Child taxCruises: expenses)care expenses ............ . 204 credit) ................ . 7, 8, 141Travel expenses when incidental Casualty losses (See CapitalCredit for prior year minimum tax: Birth of ..................... . 31business activities ....... . 176 losses)Nonrefundable ............. . 248 Born and died within year .... . 12,Work-related education, deduction Changing claim after filing, needRefundable ................ . 252 35of expenses ............. . 194 to amend ................ . 16Credit for the elderly or the Death of ................... . 31Charitable contributions (See alsoCustodial fees .............. . 198disabled .................. . 204 Deceased dependent's medicalCharitableCustody of child ............. . 27Nontaxable payments ...... . 224 and dental expenses ..... . 141contributions) ........ . 157-166Customers  (See also Disabled dependent careCredit or debit cards: Dental expenses (See MedicalEntertainment expenses) ... . 175, expenses, deductionPayment of taxes ........ . 10, 14 and dental expenses)177 for ...................... . 143Convenience fee of service Depreciation ................ . 96Business travel to meet ..... . 180 Exemption for ........... . 24-35providers .............. . 14 Estate .................... . 198Travel expenses of, paying Filing requirements ........... . 6Installment agreements ... . 15 Fee-basis governmentfor ...................... . 175 Earned income, unearnedCredit reports: officials ................. . 188 income, and gross incomeCosts not included in property Impairment-related work levels (Table 1-2) ......... . 5basis .................... . 96 expenses ........... . 144, 189D Married, filing joint return .... . 25,Fees for, not deductible .... . 156 Interest (See Interest payments)Daily allowance  (See Per diem) 28Credit to holders of tax credit Investment expenses ...... . 156 Medical and dentalDamage to property  (See alsobonds .................... . 248 IRA contributions (See Individual expenses ............... . 141Casualty losses) ........... . 166 retirement arrangements (IRAs))Credits ................. . 202, 204 Qualifying child ......... . 26, 141Disasters (See also Disaster Itemizing (See ItemizedAlternative motor vehicle ... . 247 Qualifying relative ....... . 30, 141relief) ................... . 169 deductions)Build America bonds (See Credit Social security number ...... . 12Damages ................... . 196 Long-term care insuranceto holders of tax credit bonds) Adoption taxpayer identificationDamages from lawsuits ...... . 91 contracts ................ . 142Capital gains, undistributed, credit number ............. . 12, 35Medical expenses as part of Medical expenses (See Medicalfor tax on ............ . 65, 250 Alien dependents ......... . 35settlement ............... . 144 and dental expenses)Changing claim ............. . 16 Standard deduction for ..... . 138Dating your return ........... . 13 Mortgage interest (SeeChild and dependent care (See Travel expenses for ........ . 175Mortgages)Child and dependent care Daycare centers  (See also Child Dependents not allowed to claimNot itemizing, use of Formcredit) and dependent care credit; Child dependents ................ . 251040A ..................... . 7Child tax (See Child tax credit) care) ................ . 8, 45, 215 Depletion allowance ......... . 89Pass-through entities ....... . 198Clean renewable energy bonds De minimis benefits .......... . 47 Deposits .................... . 215Penalties, no deduction(See Credit to holders of tax Deadlines  (See Due dates) Loss on ................... . 198permitted ............... . 156credit bonds) Death  (See Decedents) Losses on ............. . 104, 167Performing artists'Earned income (See Earned Death benefits: Reporting of ............. . 172expenses ............... . 189income credit) Accelerated ................ . 87 Prepaid insuranceEducation (See Education credits) Depreciation:Life insurance proceeds (See Life premiums ............... . 143Elderly or the disabled ...... . 221 Adjustment to basis for ...... . 96insurance) Prescription medicines ..... . 142Empowerment zone and renewal Alternative minimum tax andPublic safety officers who died or Rental expenses ......... . 67, 70community employment accelerated depreciation .. . 71were killed in line of duty, taxcredit ................... . 202 Repayments ................ . 88 Cars ...................... . 182exclusion ................ . 87Excess withholding ........ . 252 Section 179 deductions: Cell phone ................ . 196Death of child ................ . 26First-time homebuyer ...... . 250 Adjustment to basis for .... . 96 Change of use of property ... . 99Death of dependent .......... . 31Foreign tax ................ . 248 Car expenses ........... . 182 Computer ................. . 196
Debt instruments  (See Bonds orGulf tax credit bonds (See Credit Self-employed persons: Correcting amount claimed .. . 70
Notes)to holders of tax credit bonds) Health insurance Form 4562:
Debts  (See also Bad debts) ... . 17,Health coverage ........... . 251 premiums ............. . 145 Rental property
87Health coverage tax (See Health Social security and railroad depreciation ............ . 70
Canceled (See Cancellation ofcoverage tax credit) retirement benefits ........ . 84 Home computer ........... . 198
debt)Hope scholarship ........... . 21 Standard deduction .... . 137-139 Property used in trade or
Nonrecourse ............... . 85Lifetime learning (See Lifetime Stop-smoking programs .... . 142 business, as noncapital
Paid by another ............. . 11learning credit) Student loan interest deduction assets .................. . 103
Payoff of debt included in salesMaking Work Pay .......... . 252 (See Student loans) Real property:
transaction .............. . 100Midwestern tax credit bonds (See Theft loss ................. . 199 Gain from disposition of
Public, gifts to reduce ....... . 15Credit to holders of tax credit Transportation expenses (See property ........... . 71, 111
Recourse .................. . 85bonds) Travel and transportation Land, no depreciation of ... . 70
Mortgage interest .......... . 248 Refund offset against ..... . 9, 14 expenses) Rental property .......... . 67, 70

Page 277 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Designated Roth Account .... . 75, Discount, bonds and notes issued Use of home after Self-employed ............. . 235
78 at ......................... . 60 divorce ................. . 110 Earned income credit ... . 204, 233
Defined. ................... . 74 Discounted debt instruments Doctors' bills  (See Medical and Advance ..................... . 7
(See also Original issue discount dental expenses)Destroyed records .......... . 183 Filing requirements (Table
(OID)) ..................... . 43 Documentary evidence: 1-3) ..................... . 7Diaper service .............. . 142
Capital gain or loss ........ . 103 Recordkeeping Considered unmarried ....... . 22Differential wage payments .. . 46
Discounts: requirements ............ . 183 Disability benefits .......... . 235Differential wages:
Employee discounts, effect on Domestic help: Disability insuranceWages for reservists: basis .................... . 97 Withholding ................ . 36 payments ............... . 235Military reserves .......... . 50 Distributions  (See also Dividends; Filing claim ................... . 7Domestic help, no exemptionDirect deposit of refunds ..... . 13 Rollovers) ............... . 43, 77 for ........................ . 24 Foster child ............... . 236Directors' fees ............... . 92 Early (See Early withdrawal from Married filing separately ..... . 21Domestic relations orders,Disabilities, persons with  (See deferred interest account) qualified (QDROs): Military personnel .......... . 238also Elderly or the Liquidating distributions ..... . 65 Rollover of retirement plan Social security card ........ . 238disabled) .............. . 212, 221 Lump sum (See Lump-sum distribution ............... . 78 Social security number ..... . 238Accrued leave payment ..... . 51 distributions) Donations  (See Charitable Two persons with same qualifyingArmed forces ............... . 50 Nondividend distributions .... . 65 contributions) child ..................... . 28Blind (See Blind persons) Qualified reservist ........... . 80 Down payment assistance ... . 91 Earthquakes  (See also DisasterCafeteria plans ............. . 51 Required minimum distributions relief) ..................... . 169Droughts:Credit for (See Elderly or disabled, (See also Individual retirement Casualty loss caused by .... . 166Losses of property due to ... . 167credit for) arrangements (IRAs); Easements:Drug or alcohol rehabilitationPensions) ....... . 80, 125, 126Dependent who is disabled, centers: Adjustment to basis for ...... . 97deduction for care Return of capital ............ . 65 Deductibility of medical Economic recovery payment:expenses ............... . 143 District of Columbia: expense ................ . 142 Government retiree credit:Guide dogs, deductible as medical First-time homebuyer Drugs: Making work pay credit .... . 91expense ................ . 142 credit ................... . 108 As medical expenses: Education:Impairment-related work expenses Dividends  (See also Form Over-the-counter drugs, not Savings bond program ...... . 59of .................. . 144, 189 1099-DIV) ............ . 62-66, 63 deductible ............. . 142 Education credits ......... . 8, 230Work-related education ... . 195 Alaska Permanent Fund (See Prescription medicines, Academic period ........... . 230Alaska Permanent FundInsurance costs ............. . 51 deductibility ........... . 142 Eligible educationaldividends)Military and government Dry cleaning: institution ............... . 230As stock dividends and stockpensions ................. . 51 Business-related travel Married filing separately ..... . 21rights .................... . 65Public assistance benefits ... . 90 expense ............ . 174, 175 Recapture of ................. . 8Backup withholding ......... . 63Reporting of disability pension Dual-status taxpayers .......... . 6 Filing requirements (TableBeneficiary of estate or trustincome .................. . 51 Joint returns not available ... . 20 1-3) ..................... . 7receiving ................. . 63Retirement, pensions, and Standard deduction ........ . 137 Timing of ................ . 231Buying more stock with ...... . 64profit-sharing plans ....... . 51 Due dates ..................... . 9 Refund of expenses ........ . 231Defined .................... . 63Signing of return by 2010 dates (Table 1-5) ........ . 9Exempt-interest dividends ... . 65 Education expenses:court-appointed Disaster areas, postponedExpenses related to, deduction Employer-provided (Seerepresentative ............ . 13 deadlines ............... . 172of ....................... . 66 Educational assistance)Social security and railroad Extension (See Extension of timeFees to collect ............. . 198 Tuition (See Qualified tuitionretirement benefits, deductions to file)Foreign income ............. . 62 programs)for ....................... . 84 Nonresident aliens' returns .. . 10Form 1040A, use of ........... . 7 Work-related education, deductionSpecial school or home for, Due diligence: of expenses ............. . 194Form 1099-DIV (See Formdeductibility of medical Child and dependent care1099-DIV) Educational assistance:expense ................ . 142 credit ................... . 216Holding period, determination Employer-provided .......... . 47Terrorist attack as cause of injury, Dues:of ...................... . 105 Scholarships (See Scholarshipsdisability payments excluded Chamber of Commerce ..... . 196Insurance dividends ......... . 66 and fellowships)from taxation ............. . 74 Club ...................... . 200Money market funds ........ . 64 Tuition (See Qualified tuitionWorkers' compensation ..... . 52 Union ..................... . 197Nominees receiving on behalf of programs)Disability: Dwelling units  (See also Home;another .................. . 63 Educational institution  (SeeIncome ................... . 223 Vacation homes) ..... . 23, 68, 69,Nondividend distributions .... . 65 Eligible educational institution)Disability benefits: 70Ordinary dividends .......... . 63 Educational organizations:Earned income credit ...... . 235 Cooperative (See CooperativePatronage dividends ........ . 66 As related party inDisability insurance payments: housing)Qualified ................ . 63, 66 transactions ............. . 102Defined .................... . 69Earned income credit ...... . 235 Real estate investment trusts Charitable contributionsRenting (See Rental income and(REITs) paying ........... . 65Disability, permanent and total to ...................... . 158expenses)Redemption treated as ..... . 100disability ................. . 221 50% limit on deduction ... . 163Reinvestment plans ......... . 64Disabled: EE series bonds  (See U.S. savingsReporting of ................ . 66Child ....................... . 26 bonds)As interest ............... . 63 EDependent ................. . 31 E-file ..................... . 2, 4, 8Scrip dividends ............. . 65 Early withdrawal from deferredDisaster Assistance Act of 1988: Extensions of time to file ..... . 10Sold stock .................. . 63 interest account:Withholding ................ . 39 On time filing ............... . 10Stockholder debts when canceled Annuities ................... . 79Disaster loss, standard deduction EIC  (See Earned income credit)as ....................... . 86 Form 1099-R reporting (See Formincreased by ............. . 138 EITC Assistant .............. . 233Veterans' insurance ......... . 66 1099-R)Disaster relief  (See also Terrorist Elderly or disabled, creditDivorced parents ......... . 27, 29 Form 5329 reporting (See Formattacks) ......... . 52, 74, 90, 169 for .......................... . 85329)Divorced taxpayers  (See alsoCash gifts to victims ........ . 169 Married filing separately ..... . 21Higher education expenses,Alimony) ................... . 91Disaster Relief and Emergency Elderly persons  (See alsoexception from penalty ... . 120Child and dependent careAssistance Act: Pensions) .................. . 74IRAs:credit ................... . 214Grants ................... . 90 Credit for (See Elderly or disabled,Early distributions,Child custody ............... . 27Unemployment credit for)defined ............... . 128Definition of divorce instrument forassistance ............. . 89 Exemption fromPenalties ............ . 126, 128purposes of alimony ..... . 132Employer's emergency disaster withholding ............... . 38Section 457 deferredEstimated tax payments ..... . 43fund .................... . 169 Home for the aged .......... . 32compensation plans ....... . 79Filing status ............. . 19, 20
Government-ordered demolition or Long-term care (See Long-termTax on ..................... . 79IRAs .................. . 122, 126relocation of home that is care insurance contracts)Earned income ............. . 241Medical and dental expenses ofunsafe due to ........... . 166 Nutrition Program for thechildren of ............... . 141 Child and dependent care
Grants or payments ......... . 90 Elderly ................... . 90credit ................... . 214Mortgage interest, payment as
Replacement of lost or destroyed Standard deduction for age 65 oralimony ................. . 152 Defined:
property ................. . 169 older .................... . 137Personal exemption ......... . 24 For purposes of standard
Tax Counseling for theDischarge of qualified principal deduction ............. . 138Real estate taxes, allocation
Elderly ..................... . 9residence of ...................... . 148 Dependent filing requirements
indebtedness ......... . 107, 109 Election precinct officials:(Table 1-2) ................. . 5Transfers between
Disclosure statement ........ . 18 spouses ............. . 98, 102 Employee ................. . 235 Fees, reporting of ........... . 92

Page 278 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Election to include child's income Employees of the intelligence Receiving income from IRAs for failure to take minimum
on parent's return .... . 205-207 community ............... . 110 estate ................... . 91 distributions ............. . 126
Inclusion of child's income on Roth IRAs ................. . 130Rollover restrictions ......... . 78Employers:
parent's return (Figure Exclusions from gross income:Educational assistance from (See Estate tax:
31-A) ................... . 206 Educational assistance) Accelerated death benefits .. . 87Deduction ................. . 150
Elective deferrals  (See also E-file options ................. . 9 Annuities ................... . 75Estates  (See also Estate
Retirement plans) ........... . 74 Form W-4, having new employees Canceled debt .............. . 86beneficiaries) ............... . 91
Limits ...................... . 49 fill out .................... . 38 Capital gains from home sale (SeeIncome .................... . 91
Elective surgery: Sale of home)Overseas employment (See Investment interest ......... . 155
Not deductible as medical Foreign employment) Commuting benefits forTax (See also Estate
expense ................ . 142 employees ............... . 48Withholding rules ........... . 37 tax) ................. . 150, 199
De minimis benefits ......... . 47Electric cars: Employment: Survivor's annuity ......... . 80
Disability pensions of federalCredit ..................... . 181 Agency fees ............ . 91, 196 Estimated tax ............. . 36-43
employees and military .... . 51Credits: RÂesumÂe expenses ......... . 196 Amount to pay to avoid
Education Savings BondFiling requirements (Table Taxes (See also Social security penalty .................. . 41
Program ................. . 931-3) ..................... . 7 and Medicare taxes) ...... . 46 Avoiding ................... . 40
Educational assistance fromElectronic filing  (See E-file) FICA withholding (See also Change in estimated tax ..... . 42 employer ................. . 47Withholding) ........... . 11Electronic payment options .... . 2 Credit for ............ . 36, 42, 43 Elective deferrals, limit onTip income ........... . 7, 8, 53Credit card ................. . 42 Definition ................... . 36 exclusion ................ . 49Credit or debit card ......... . 14 Employment taxes  (See also Divorced taxpayers ......... . 43 Employee awards ........... . 45Electronic Federal Tax Payment Social security and Medicare Electronic funds Energy conservationSystem (EFTPS) ...... . 14, 42 taxes) ............ . 212, 215, 217 withdrawal ............... . 42 subsidies ............. . 91, 94Electronic funds FICA withholding (See also Figuring amount of tax ...... . 41 Foreign earned income ........ . 2withdrawal ............ . 14, 42 Withholding) .... . 36, 37, 39, 42 First period, no income subject to Frozen deposit interest ...... . 93Electronic reporting: Empowerment zone ......... . 202 estimated tax in ........... . 41 Group-term life insurance .... . 48Returns (See E-file) Endowment proceeds ........ . 87 Fiscal year taxpayers ....... . 41 Long-term care insuranceTip statement from employees to Married taxpayers ........... . 41Energy assistance ........... . 90 contracts ................. . 52employers ................ . 54 Name change .............. . 43Energy conservation: Parking fees,Eligible educational institution: Not required ................ . 40Measures and employer-provided ........ . 48Education credits .......... . 230 Overpayment applied to ..... . 13modifications ............. . 91 Public safety officers who died orForeign schools ........... . 135 Payment vouchers .......... . 42Subsidies .................. . 91 were killed in line of duty, deathStudent loan interest Exclusion as adjustment to Payments ............... . 15, 42 benefits .................. . 87deduction ............... . 135 basis .................. . 97 Figuring amount of each Sale of home ............... . 93Eligible student: Utility rebates ............... . 94 payment ............... . 41 Scholarships ............... . 93Student loan interest Schedule ................ . 41Entertainers and Strike benefits .............. . 94deduction ............... . 135 musicians ................ . 197 When to start ............. . 41 Terrorist attack as cause of injury,Embezzlement: Who must make .......... . 40Entertainment expenses .... . 175, disability payments ....... . 74Losses due to ............. . 167 Penalty for underpayment ... . 36,177 Executors andReporting embezzled 42, 43, 20550% limit .................. . 178 administrators ............... . 5funds .................... . 93 IRS computation of, FormFigure 26-A summary of Related partyEmergency medical service 2210 .................. . 44rules .................. . 178 transactions ............. . 102personnel: Pension payments .......... . 75Allocation of costs ..... . 179, 183 Exempt-interest dividends ... . 56Life insurance proceeds when Safe harbor for higher incomeBusiness-related gifts vs. ... . 179 Alternative minimum tax ..... . 66death in line of duty ....... . 87 individuals ............... . 36Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill Dividend reporting .......... . 66Emotional distress Saturday, Sunday, holidayout ..................... . 188 Information-reportingdamages .................. . 91 rule ...................... . 41Meal expenses included .... . 179 requirement .............. . 66Employee benefits  (See also Separate returns ............ . 43Proof of expenses ......... . 182 Exemption from foreign tax creditFringe benefits; specific type of Social security or railroadTable 26-2 summary ..... . 183 limit ...................... . 248benefit (e.g., Health insurance, retirement benefits ........ . 82Recordkeeping Exemptions:Life insurance, etc.)) .... . 38, 46, State and local income taxes,requirements ............ . 182 Dependents ............. . 24-3547 deduction of ............. . 146Reporting of ............... . 184 From withholding ........... . 38Employee business UnemploymentTable 26-3 showing forms to be Personal (See Personalexpenses ............. . 172-189 compensation ............ . 89used .................. . 187 exemption)Commuting expenses ...... . 181 Estimates:Taking turns paying for meals or Phaseout .................. . 21Deductions for ......... . 172, 173 entertainment ........... . 179 Travel expenses ........... . 182 Securities, tax-exempt (SeeForm 2106 for Tickets .................... . 179 Excess benefits tax  (See Section Securities)deducting ............. . 184 Face-value as deductible 72(m)(5)) State or local government bonds,Impairment-related work amount ............... . 179 Excess reimbursements: tax-exempt .............. . 104expenses, deduction Gift vs. entertainment Business expense Expatriates ................. . 111for .................. . 144, 189 deduction ............. . 179 reimbursements ...... . 38, 187 Expenses paid by another ... . 92Meals (See Meal and lodging Entertainment facilities: Medical expenses .......... . 144expenses) Extension of time to file ...... . 10Expenses for use of ........ . 179 Excess reimbursementReimbursements (See also Per Automatic .................. . 10flowchart (FigureEquipment  (See alsodiem) ........ . 38, 45, 185, 186 Citizens outside U.S. ........ . 1021-A) ................. . 144Tools) .................... . 181Returning excess ..... . 38, 187 E-file options ............... . 10Rental for rental property .... . 68 Excess withholding credit ... . 252Travel (See Travel and Inclusion on return .......... . 10How to take ............... . 253Equitable relief  (See Innocenttransportation expenses) Extortion:spouse relief) Joint returns ............... . 252Work-related education ..... . 191, Losses due to ............. . 167Errors: Exchange students:195 Extravagant expenses ...... . 179Depreciation, correcting amount Expenses paid for, deductibleEmployee expenses: Eye surgery:on Form 1040X ........... . 70 when under agreement withCell phone ................ . 196 Deductibility as medicalqualified organization .... . 160Discovery after filing, need toHome computer ....... . 196, 198 expense ................ . 142amend return ............. . 16 Exchanges  (See also Trade ofMiscellaneous ............. . 196 Eyeglasses:Form 1099 showing incorrect property) .............. . 100, 101Employees  (See also Fringe As medical expense ........ . 142amount .................. . 63 Like-kind exchanges .... . 97, 101benefits) ................ . 46, 47 Form W-2c for corrected wage Partially nontaxableAwards for service .......... . 45 and tax statement ......... . 43 exchange ............ . 98, 101Business expenses (See FRefunds ................... . 16 Taxable exchange,Employee business expenses) Failure to comply with tax lawsdefined .................. . 97Escrow:Discounts for, effect on (See Penalties)Tax-free:Taxes placed in, whenbasis .................... . 97 Fair market value (FMV):deductible ............... . 148 Definition of .............. . 97Form W-4 to be filled out when
Casualty loss .............. . 168Holding period, determinationEstate beneficiaries  (See alsostarting new job ........... . 38
Definition of ................ . 95of .................... . 105Inheritance) ............ . 98, 105Fringe benefits (See also Fringe
Sales of property .......... . 100Dividends received by ....... . 63 Excise taxes  (See alsobenefits) ................. . 38
Stolen property ............ . 168Penalties) ................. . 126IRAs (See Individual retirementJury duty pay ............... . 93
Fair rental price .............. . 69arrangements (IRAs)) Basis to include ............. . 95Overseas employment (See
Foreign employment) Losses of estate ............ . 92 Deductibility (Table 22-1) ... . 147 Fair rental value ............. . 32

Page 279 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Family  (See also Child tax credit; Joint filing (See also Joint Waiver of alien status ....... . 50 Residential Energy
Children; Dependents; Related returns) .................. . 20 Credits ............... . 249Foreign governments, employees
party transactions) ...... . 6, 102, Schedule A, Mortgage interestLate filing penalties (See of ......................... . 50
210, 225 deduction ............. . 248Penalties) Foreign income:
Adoption credit (See Adoption) Social security benefits,Most taxpayers (Table 1-1) .... . 4 Dividends .................. . 62
reporting on ............ . 82Other situations requiring filingCare credit (See Child and Earned income exclusion ...... . 2
Student loan interest(Table 1-3) ................. . 7dependent care credit) Reporting of .................. . 2
deduction ............. . 136Unmarried persons (See SingleStandard meal allowance not Foreign income taxes: Tip income reporting ...... . 54taxpayers)allowed if related to Deduction of ............... . 146 Undistributed long-term capitalWhen to file .................. . 9employer ................ . 186 Form 1116 to claim gains ................. . 250Where to file .............. . 4, 15Farming: credit ................. . 150 Use of .............. . 8, 20, 21Who must file ............ . 4, 5, 6Activity not for profit ......... . 91 Schedule A or Form 1040 Wages and salaryFiling status ............ . 5, 19-24Canceled debt, treatment reporting .............. . 150 reporting ............... . 45Annulled marriages ......... . 19of ....................... . 86 Definition of ............... . 145 Workers' compensation ... . 52Change to, after time ofPatronage dividends ........ . 66 Foreign nationals  (See Resident 1040, Schedule A:filing ..................... . 16Farmworkers: aliens) Charitable contributions ... . 15,Divorced taxpayers ......... . 19Estimated tax ............... . 40 Foreign organizations: 157, 166Head of household ....... . 19, 21Withholding ................ . 36 Charitable contributions Employee business expenseQualifying person to fileFederal crime investigations or to .................. . 158, 161 deduction ............. . 188as ..................... . 23prosecutions: Foreign schools ............ . 135 Federal employees buying backJoint returns ................ . 20Travel expenses ........... . 174 Foreign Service ............. . 110 sick leave .............. . 52Married filing a jointFederal employees: Foreign students ............ . 26 Gifts, deduction of ....... . 184return ................... . 235Accrued leave payment ..... . 46 Expenses paid for, deductible Investment expensesMarried filing separately ..... . 20,Cost-of-living allowances .... . 46 when under agreement with deduction ............. . 156234Disability pensions .......... . 51 qualified organization .... . 160 Investment interestSurviving spouse ........... . 19Based on years of Foreign tax credit ........... . 248 deduction ............. . 157Unmarried persons (See alsoservice ................ . 51 How to take ............... . 248 Itemized deductionSingle taxpayers) ....... . 5, 19Exclusion, conditions for ... . 51 Limit on ................... . 248 limit .................. . 139Final return for decedent:Terrorist attack ........... . 52 Forgiveness of debt  (See Loss of deposits due to bank'sCapital loss deduction on ... . 114FECA payments ............ . 52 Cancellation of debt) insolvency or bankruptcyMedical expenses .......... . 141Federal Employees' cause ................. . 167Form:Standard deduction ........ . 137Compensation Act (FECA) Medical and dental843:Finance charges:payments .................. . 52 expenses ............. . 144Claim for refund and request forCredit cards, retail installmentFederal government: Outplacement services,abatement ............ . 252contracts, etc., notCharitable contributions deduction .............. . 46982:deductible ............... . 156to ...................... . 158 Travel expenses, deductionReduction of tax attributes dueFinancial institutions  (See alsoEmployees (See Federal of .................... . 186to discharge of indebtednessBanks) ................ . 104, 121employees) Unearned commission,(and section 1082 basisFinancially disabledFederal income tax: deduction for repaymentadjustment) ........... . 109persons ................... . 17 of ..................... . 45Interest on, not 1040 ................... . 62, 204Fines  (See also Penalties) .... . 10, 1040, Schedule B:deductible ............... . 156 Address .................. . 1518, 19 Dividends ................ . 66Not deductible ............. . 150 Adoption expenses ...... . 250Deductibility ............... . 200 1040, Schedule C:Deductibility (Table Alaska Permanent FundFirefighters: Barter income ............ . 8522-1) ................. . 147 dividends .............. . 66Life insurance proceeds when Child care providers ....... . 45Alien taxpayer identificationFederal judges: death in line of duty ....... . 87 Corporate director fees .... . 92numbers ............... . 35Employer retirement plan Volunteer firefighters: Forgiveness of debts ...... . 85Alternative minimum tax,coverage ................ . 123 Charitable contributions Foster-care providers ..... . 92nonrefundable credit for priorFee-basis officials: to .................... . 158 year tax ............... . 249 Kickbacks ................ . 93Business expenses of ...... . 188 IRAs .................... . 123 Armed forces' retirement Notary fees .............. . 92Work-related education Fires: pay .................... . 50 Oil, gas, or mineral interestexpenses ............... . 195 Arson, no casualty loss Attachments to ........... . 13 royalties ............... . 89Fees  (See also specific types of for ...................... . 167 Capital gains ............. . 66 Rental income anddeductions and income) ..... . 92, Casualty loss caused by .... . 166, expenses ........... . 71, 88Charitable contributions,215 170 deduction to be Statutory employees ..... . 184Professional license ........ . 201 First-time homebuyer itemized .............. . 157 Work-related educationFellowships  (See Scholarships and credit ................. . 108, 250 Check mailed with ........ . 14 expenses ............. . 194fellowships) Recapture ................. . 112 Child's capital gain 1040, Schedule C-EZ:Fertility enhancement procedures: First-year expensing  (See Section distributions ........... . 156 Child care providers ....... . 45Deductibility as medical 179 deductions) Clergy pension ........... . 49 Corporate director fees .... . 92expense ................ . 142 Deduction for alimonyFiscal year ............ . 11, 41, 43 Foster-care providers ..... . 92FICA withholding  (See also Social paid .................. . 134 Kickbacks ................ . 93Fishermen:security and Medicare taxes; Disability retirement pay ... . 51 Notary fees .............. . 92Estimated tax ............... . 40Withholding) ..... . 11, 36, 37, 39, Dividends ................ . 66 Oil, gas, or mineral interestIndian fishing rights ......... . 9342, 46 Excess withholding royalties ............... . 89Fleet operations:Fiduciaries  (See also Executors credit ................. . 253 Rental income andStandard mileage rate notand administrators; FECA benefits ............ . 52 expenses ........... . 71, 88allowed ................. . 182Trustees) .......... . 5, 121, 122 First-time homebuyer Statutory employees ..... . 184Flexible spending account orFees for services ........... . 92 credit ................. . 251 Work-related educationarrangement .............. . 142Prohibited transactions ..... . 127 Foreign tax credit ........ . 248 expenses ............. . 194Floods  (See also DisasterRelated party Health insurance credit ... . 252 1040, Schedule D:relief) ..................... . 169transactions ............. . 102 Insurance distributions .... . 66 Business propertyCasualty loss caused by .... . 166Figures  (See Tables and figures) IRAs ................ . 127, 129 sales ................. . 101FMV  (See Fair market value)Figuring taxes and credits  (See Mortgage interest Capital gains or losses ... . 112,Food benefits:also Worksheets) ...... . 81, 136, credit ................. . 248 113Nutrition program for the202, 252 Personal exemption ....... . 24 Child's capital gainelderly ................... . 90Filing requirements  (See also distributions ........... . 156Presidential Election CampaignFood stamps ................ . 32Married filing Fund .................. . 12 Fractional shares, saleForeclosure ............ . 107, 153separately) ............ . 4-19, 20 Railroad retirement benefits, of ..................... . 65
Foreign children:Calendar year filers ........... . 9 reporting on ............ . 82 Nonbusiness bad debts, loss of
Adoption credit ............ . 250Citizens outside U.S. .......... . 5 Recapture of alimony .... . 134 deposits due to bank's
Dependents ............... . 5, 6 Foreign employment ....... . 6, 50 insolvency orReporting of alimony
Electronic (See E-file) Employment abroad ......... . 50 bankruptcy ............ . 167received .............. . 134
Extensions ................. . 10 Pension plan contributions ... . 75 Sale expenses .......... . 113Reporting taxes on tips not
Gross income levels (Table Social security and Medicare reported to employer .... . 54 Undistributed long-term capital
1-1) ....................... . 4 taxes .................... . 50 gains ................. . 113Reporting uncollected taxes on
Individual taxpayers ........... . 5 U.S. citizen ................. . 50 tips .................... . 54 Worthless securities ..... . 100

Page 280 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1098: 2848: 8615 ....................... . 55Form: (Cont.)
Power of attorney andMore than one borrower (not Certain children with more than1040, Schedule E:
declaration ofspouse), reporting of $1,900 of investmentIncome-producing property,
representative ....... . 13, 20mortgage interest deduction income ............... . 207deduction of interest on loan
by attaching of ........ . 157 3115 ....................... . 58for .................... . 157 Form 1040A may be used when
3800:Mortgage insurance premiums filing ..................... . 8Rental income and
reported on ........... . 155 General business credit ... . 17expenses .............. . 71 Net investment income ... . 209
4029 ...................... . 235Mortgage interest overpaid inRoyalties ................. . 89 Parental information ..... . 209
earlier year ............ . 152 4070:1040, Schedule F: Sample completed
Reporting tips toMortgage interestSelf-employed persons ... . 184 form .................. . 210
employer .............. . 54statement ...... . 71, 87, 155Work-related education 8801:4070A:Points reported on ....... . 155expenses ............. . 194 Alternative minimumDaily record of tips ........ . 53Prepaid interest reported1040, Schedule SE ....... . 6, 49 tax ................... . 2494137:on .................... . 1551040A ................. . 61, 204 8812:Social security and MedicareRefund of interest reportedAddress .................. . 15 Additional child taxtaxes on tips not reported toon .................... . 155Adoption expenses ...... . 250 credit ................. . 225employer .............. . 541098-C:Alaska Permanent Fund 8814 ....................... . 554361 ...................... . 235Contributions of Motor Vehicles,dividends .............. . 66 Additional tax, figuring4506:Boats, and Airplanes ... . 162Alien taxpayer identification of .................... . 206Copy of tax return1098-E .................... . 136numbers ............... . 35 Calculation of child'srequest ................ . 161099:Armed forces' retirement income ............... . 2064506-T:Taxable income report .... . 11,pay .................... . 50 Capital gainsTax return transcript45Attachments to return ..... . 13 distributions ........... . 206request ................ . 161099-A:Capital gains ............. . 66 Parents' election to report4562:Acquisition or abandonment ofClergy pension ........... . 49 child's interest andDepreciation of rentalsecured property ...... . 107Disability retirement pay ... . 51 dividends .......... . 63, 156property ............... . 701099-B .................... . 113Dividends ................ . 66 Reduced deductions or4684:Barter income ............ . 85Excess withholding credits ................ . 205Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sBroker to report sales of stocks,credit ................. . 253 Sample form ............ . 207insolvency orbonds, orFECA benefits ............ . 52 8815 ....................... . 59bankruptcy ............ . 167commodities ...... . 100, 113Insurance distributions .... . 66 8818 ....................... . 60Casualty or theft loss ..... . 166,1099-C:IRA distributions ......... . 127 8822:172Cancellation of debt ....... . 85,Personal exemption ....... . 24 Change of address ....... . 164797:107Presidential Election Campaign Sales of business 8824:1099-CAP:Fund .................. . 12 property .......... . 101, 111 Like-kind exchanges ..... . 101Change in control or capitalRailroad retirement benefits, Small business stock 8828:structure .............. . 113reporting on ............ . 82 losses ................ . 104 Recapture of federal mortgage1099-DIV:Reporting pay ............ . 45 4868 .................... . 10, 35 subsidy ............... . 112Dividend incomeSocial security benefits, Automatic extension of time to 8834:statement ....... . 49, 63, 66reporting on ............ . 82 file ................. . 10, 35Return of capital .......... . 65 Plug-in Electric VehicleStudent loan interest Filing electronic form ...... . 10 Credit ................. . 2491099-G:deduction ............. . 136 Filing paper form ......... . 10State tax refunds ......... . 87 8839:Tip income reporting ...... . 54 4952:1099-INT ................ . 56, 62 Qualified adoptionUse of .............. . 7, 20, 21 Investment interest expense1099-MISC: expenses .......... . 47, 250Workers' compensation ... . 52 deduction ............. . 156Brokers receiving 8853:1040EZ ................... . 204 Net capital gain, election todividends .............. . 63 Accelerated deathinclude as investmentAddress .................. . 15 Nonemployee benefits ................ . 87income ............... . 155Alaska Permanent Fund compensation .......... . 92 Archer MSAs and long-term4972:dividends .............. . 66 1099-OID .................. . 61 care insuranceLump-sum distributions .... . 77FECA benefits ............ . 52 1099-R .................... . 59 contracts ............... . 475329:No attachments ........... . 13 Early distributions of pension 8857:Early distributions of shelteredPersonal exemption ....... . 24 funds .................. . 79 Innocent spouse relief ..... . 20funds .................. . 79Presidential Election Campaign IRA distributions ..... . 127, 129 8862 ...................... . 233Required minimum distributions,Fund .................. . 12 Life insurance policy 8874:failure to take ....... . 80, 129Reporting pay ............ . 45 surrendered for cash .... . 86 New markets credit, filing5695:Tip income reporting ...... . 54 Retirement plan requirements (TableResidential EnergyUse of ................. . 7, 20 distributions ............ . 13 1-3) ..................... . 7Credits ............... . 249Workers' compensation ... . 52 1099-S .................... . 113 8879:6251 ...................... . 2031040NR: Real estate transactions Alternative minimum Authorization for E-file providerNonresident alien return ... . 10 proceeds ......... . 107, 113 tax ................... . 210 to use self-selected1040NR-EZ: 1116: 6252: PIN ...................... . 9Nonresident alien easy Foreign tax credit ........ . 248 Installment sale 8880:return .................. . 10 1120S: income ............... . 111 Credit for Qualified Retirement1040-V: S corporation income ..... . 87 8275: SavingsPayment voucher ......... . 14 2106: Disclosure statement ...... . 18 Contributions .......... . 2501040X: Business-related 8275-R: 8885:Amended individual expenses ......... . 184, 188 Regulation disclosure Health insurance credit ... . 252return .................. . 16 Performing artists ........ . 189 statement .............. . 18 8901:Annulled marriages ....... . 19 Travel expenses ......... . 186 8283: Information on QualifyingBad debts, claim for Work-related education Charitable noncash contribution Children Who Are Notrefund ................ . 105 expenses ............. . 195 of more than $500 Dependents ........... . 225Change of filing status .... . 21 2106-EZ: value ................. . 166 8910:Check mailed with ........ . 14 Business-related 8379: Alternative motor vehicleChild's return ............ . 209 expenses ............. . 188 Injured spouse claim ...... . 14 credit ................. . 247Completing ............... . 16 Performing artists ........ . 189 8396: 8911:Depreciation: Correcting amount Work-related education Mortgage interest Alternative fuel vehicle refuelingof ..................... . 70 expenses ............. . 195 credit ............. . 152, 248 property credit ......... . 248Filing .................... . 17 2119: 8582: 8912:Itemized deduction, change to Postponement of gain from sale Passive activity gains or
Credit to Holders of Tax Creditstandard deduction .... . 139 of home ............... . 108 losses ............. . 71, 113
Bonds ................ . 248Standard deduction, change to 2439: 8606:
8936:itemized deductions .... . 139 Notice to shareholder on IRA contributions,
Plug-in electric drive motorWorthless securities, claim for undistributed long-term capital Nondeductible .... . 120, 124,
vehicle credit .......... . 249refund ................ . 100 gains .............. . 65, 250 127
1065: 9465:2441 ...................... . 217 IRA contributions,
Partnership income ....... . 87 2555 ...................... . 235 Recharacterization Installment agreement
1096 ...................... . 113 2555-EZ .................. . 235 of .................... . 126 request ................ . 15

Page 281 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employment tax, deduction Form W-4V .................. . 39Form: (Cont.) G
of ...................... . 150 Unemployment compensation,Form 8919: Gains and losses  (See alsovoluntary withholdingForm 1040, Schedule A ..... . 150Uncollected social security and Capital gains; Capital gains orrequest .................. . 39Medicare tax on Form 1040, Schedule D: losses; Capital losses) ... . 7, 21,
wages ................. . 45 Form(s) 1099:Reporting sale of home ..... . 111 112
Requiring Form 1040 to be used Taxable income report ... . 39, 43 Casualty (See also CasualtyForm 1040A:
when filing ................. . 8 Forms  (See also Tax returns) ... . 4 losses) .................. . 166Estimated tax payments ..... . 43
RRB-1042S: Claim for refund for loss ..... . 17Foster care:Overpayment offset against nextRailroad retirement benefits for Collectibles ................ . 114Adoption as motive for, noyear's tax ................ . 42nonresident aliens ...... . 81 Financial institution's bankruptcycharitable deduction ..... . 160Form 1040-ES:RRB-1099: causing deductible loss ... . 167Care providers' payments ... . 92Estimated tax ............ . 41, 42Railroad retirement Reporting of ............. . 172Charitable deduction for nonprofitForm 1040-ES(NR):benefits ................ . 81 Gambling (See Gambling winningscare .................... . 160Estimated tax for nonresidentSS-5 ...................... . 234 and losses)Child tax credit ............ . 225aliens .................... . 41 Hobby losses ............... . 92Social security number Difficulty-of-care payments .. . 92Form 1099-B: Ordinary gain and loss ..... . 103request ............. . 12, 35 Emergency foster care,Barter income .............. . 43 Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sSSA-1042S: maintaining space in homeForm 1099-C: insolvency orSocial security benefits for for ....................... . 92Cancellation of Debt ........ . 43 bankruptcy ............ . 167nonresident aliens ...... . 81 Expenses unreimbursed and notForm 1099-DIV: Ordinary loss .............. . 103SSA-1099: deductible as charitable
Dividend income Passive activity (See also Passivecontributions ............ . 160Social security benefits .... . 81
statement ................ . 43 activity) .......... . 21, 71, 113W-10 ..................... . 216 Foster care payments and Related party sale or trade ofForm 1099-G:W-2: expenses .................. . 28 depreciable property ..... . 102Government payments ...... . 43Box 12 with code L ...... . 173, Foster child ..... . 26, 28, 31, 240, Short-term ............ . 103, 113Form 1099-INT:187, 188 241 Priority in deducting ...... . 114Interest income statement ... . 43Election precinct officials' Earned income credit ...... . 236 Sale or trade of property held 1fees ................... . 92 Form 1099-MISC: Foster Grandparent year or less ........... . 104Employer retirement plan Miscellaneous income ....... . 43 Program ................... . 51 Theft (See also Theftparticipation Withheld state and local Found property .............. . 92 losses) .............. . 166, 167indicated .............. . 122 taxes ................... . 146 Fractional shares: Total net gain .............. . 113Employer-reported income Form 1099-OID: Payment for ................ . 65 Gambling winnings andstatement ... . 11, 13, 45, 46, Original issue discount, from Fraternal societies: losses ................. . 92, 19949 issuer or broker ........... . 43 Charitable contributions Form 1040 ................. . 39Fringe benefits ........ . 46, 47 Form 1099-Q: to ...................... . 158 Withholding ............. . 39, 43Recordkeeping ........... . 16 Payments from Qualified Dues, no charitable Garbage pickup:Reimbursements reported as Education Programs ...... . 43 deduction ........... . 158, 161 Deductibility (Table 22-1) ... . 147part of income .... . 173, 184, Form 1099-R: Fraud: Garnishment and185, 187, 188 Losses due to ............. . 167Retirement plan attachment ................ . 11Statutory employees ..... . 184 distributions .............. . 43 Penalties ................ . 18, 38 Gas royalties ................ . 89Uncollected taxes ......... . 54 Reporting anonymously toWithheld state and local taxes Gems:W-2G: IRS ........................ . 2shown on ............... . 146 As capital assets ........... . 103Gambling winnings withholding Free tax services ........... . 269Form 1099-S: IRA prohibited transactionsstatement .............. . 92 Real Estate Proceeds ....... . 43 Freight: in ....................... . 128W-4P: Basis to include ............. . 95Real estate transactions General business credit ..... . 202Rollover distributions, election proceeds ................ . 148 Fringe benefits:not to have tax General Rule  (See Annuities)Accident and healthForm 1116:withheld ............... . 75 GI Bill benefits ............... . 34insurance ................ . 46Foreign tax credit .......... . 150W-4V: Gift taxes:Accounting period ........... . 46Form 2210:Voluntary withholding Not deductible ............. . 150Adoption, employerUnderpayment of estimatedrequest ................ . 89 Gifts:assistance ............... . 47tax ...................... . 44W-7: $25 limit on business-relatedArcher MSA contributions .... . 47Form 8332:Individual taxpayer identification expenses ............... . 179De minimis benefits ......... . 47number request ........ . 35 Release of exemption to $4 or less for business-relatedEducation assistance ....... . 47W-7A: noncustodial parent ....... . 27 expenses ............... . 179Form W-2 .................. . 46Adoption taxpayer identification Form RRB-1099: Adjusted basis for ........... . 98Group-term life insurancenumber request ..... . 12, 35 Railroad retirement Business-relatedpremiums ................ . 47W-9: benefits .................. . 43 expenses ........... . 179-180Holiday gifts ................ . 47TIN of home seller and Children, income from propertyForm SSA-1099: Retirement planningpurchaser ............. . 157 given to ................. . 209Social security benefits ...... . 43 services .................. . 48Form 1040: Disaster victims receiving cashForm W-2: Taxable income ............ . 46Estimated tax payments ..... . 43 gifts .................... . 169Employer-reported income Transportation .............. . 48Foreign income taxes, deduction Holding period, determinationstatement ................ . 42 Withholding ................ . 38of ...................... . 150 of ...................... . 105Filing with return ............ . 42 Frozen deposits:Gambling winnings .......... . 39 Holiday gifts ................ . 47Separate form from each Interest on ................. . 93 Incidental costs ofOverpayment offset against next employer ................. . 42 IRA rollover period business-relatedyear's tax ................ . 42 Withheld state and local extension ............... . 125 expenses ............... . 179Reporting sale of home ..... . 111 taxes ................... . 146 Full-time student: Not taxed .................. . 92Schedule A: Form W-2c: Child and dependent care Proof of expenses (Table 26-2State and local income taxes, Corrected wage and tax credit ................... . 214 summary) ............... . 183deduction of ........... . 150 statement ................ . 43 Fund-raising events: RecordkeepingState benefit funds, mandatory Form W-2G: Charitable contributions, amount requirements ............ . 182contributions to ........ . 146 Gambling winnings withholding deductible ............... . 159 Reporting of expenses ..... . 184Taxes, deduction of ...... . 150 statement ......... . 39, 42, 43 Rental of dwelling unit used as Table 26-3 showing forms to beSchedule C: Withheld state and local taxes home .................... . 69 used .................. . 187Real estate or personal property shown on ............... . 146 Funeral expenses ............ . 34 Schedule A (Form 1040) fortaxes on property used in Form W-4: deduction ............... . 184Funerals:business, deduction
Employee withholding allowance To reduce the public debt .... . 15Clergy, payment for ......... . 49of .................... . 150
certificate ......... . 36, 38, 40 Girl Scouts:Expenses ................. . 200Schedule E:
Filling out form and Charitable contributionsContributions to cover, notReal estate or personal property worksheets ............... . 37 to ...................... . 158deductible as charitabletaxes on rental property,
Form W-4P: donations ............. . 161 Glasses:deduction of ........... . 150
Pensions and annuities Not deductible ........... . 142 As medical expense ........ . 142Schedule F:
withholding certificate ..... . 39 Future interests:Real estate or personal property Gold and silver:
Form W-4S: Definition of ............... . 162taxes on property used in As capital assets ........... . 103
business, deduction Sick pay withholding Tangible personal property, Capital gains or losses from sale
of .................... . 150 request .................. . 39 charitable deduction for .. . 162 or trade of ............... . 114

Page 282 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employed persons, Charitable contributions NonemployeeGold and silver: (Cont.)
deductible expenses ... . 145 to .................. . 158, 161 compensation ............ . 92IRA investments in ......... . 128
Paid to agent ............... . 11Reimbursement ............ . 143 Homeworkers:Golden parachute payments:
Paid to third party ........... . 11Health insurance Deduction of expenses ..... . 184Tax on .................... . 203
Partnership ................. . 87premiums ................. . 34 Hope credit:Golf clubs  (See Country clubs) Prepaid .................... . 12Health savings account ..... . 142 Married filing separately ..... . 21Goodwill Industries  (See Recovery .................. . 87Health Spa .................. . 200Charitable contributions) Hospitals: Rental (See Rental income andHearing aids: Charitable contributions toGovernment employees: expenses)As medical expense ........ . 142 nonprofits ............... . 158Federal (See Federal employees) Royalties ................... . 8950% limit on deduction ... . 163State (See State or local Hedging transactions ....... . 103 S corporation ............... . 87governments) Meals and lodging provided forHelp  (See Tax help) Tax exempt ................ . 32patients, deductibility ..... . 142Graduate school  (See also High income taxpayers: Taxable income in excess ofPayments for services for specificEducational assistance) .... . 135 Estimated tax ............... . 40 $100,000 .................. . 8patient, not deductible asGrants  (See Scholarships and Higher education  (See Colleges Taxable income less thancharitable contributions ... . 161fellowships) and universities) $100,000 .................. . 7Services fees, deductibility ofGrants, disaster relief ........ . 90 High-low rate method to compute Tips (See Tip income)medical expense ........ . 142Gratuities  (See Tip income) per diem .................. . 186 Underreported .............. . 16Host or hostess .............. . 86Gross income: Hobbies .................... . 198 Income aid payment ........ . 197Hotels:Adjustments other than on Form Activity not for profit ......... . 91 Income from nonqualifiedClub dues:1040A, Form 1040 to be Losses ..................... . 92 deferred compensation plans:Not entertainmentused ....................... . 8 Holding period: Additional tax on ........... . 203expenses ............. . 179Age, higher filing threshold after Determination of ........... . 104 Income taxes:Not considered dwelling65 ......................... . 5 Federal (See Federal income tax)Holding period, units ..................... . 69Defined ...................... . 5 Foreign (See Foreign incomerepossessed ............. . 105 Household employees ...... . 217Filing requirements (Table taxes)Holiday gifts ................. . 471-1) ..................... . 4 Household furnishings: State or local (See State or localHoliday, deadline falling on .. . 41Dependent filing requirements Antiques (See Collectibles) income taxes)Home  (See also Casualty losses;(Table 1-2) ................. . 5 As capital assets ........... . 103 Income-producingMortgages; Refinancing; VacationRental income .............. . 67 Household items, charitable expenses ................. . 197homes) ... . 68, 69, 70, 150, 153,Gross income test ........... . 31 deduction for ............. . 161 Income-producing property:166Group-term life insurance: Household members  (See also Deduction of interest on loanAbandonment of ........... . 107Accidental death benefits .... . 47 Head of household) ......... . 19 for ...................... . 157Acquisition debt (See alsoDefinition ................... . 47 Alimony payments, spouses Indefinite absence from job:Mortgages) .............. . 150Exclusion from income ...... . 48 cannot be members of same Work-related educationAged, home for ............. . 32Limitation on ............. . 47 household ............... . 133 during .................. . 191As capital asset ............ . 103Permanent benefits ......... . 47 Household services ......... . 215Basis (See Sale of home) Independent contractors:Taxable cost, calculation Household workers  (See DomesticBusiness use of ........... . 196 Homeworkers, deduction ofof ....................... . 47 help) expenses ............... . 184Closing costs .............. . 108Uncollected social Household workers, no exemptionCost of keeping up .......... . 23 Indians:security/Medicare taxes ..... . 8 for ........................ . 24Worksheet ............... . 23 Employment credit, recapture of:Reporting of (Table 1-3) ..... . 7 Housing  (See also Home; VacationDamage to (See also Casualty Filing requirements (TableUncollected tax ............ . 203 homes) .......... . 23, 68, 69, 70losses) .................. . 166 1-3) ..................... . 7Guam: Foreclosure ............... . 107 Alimony payments made to Fishing rights ............... . 93Income from .................. . 5 cover ................... . 132Improvements: Taxes collected by tribal
Guide dogs: governments, deductionFor medical care, Clergy ..................... . 49
Deductibility as medical of ...................... . 145deductibility ........... . 142 Cooperative (See Cooperativeexpense ................ . 142 Loans for ............... . 153 housing) Individual retirement
Jointly owned: arrangements (IRAs)  (See alsoRental property (See Rental
Mortgage payments as Rollovers; Roth IRAs) ....... . 77,income and expenses)
H alimony ............... . 132 120-132, 125, 129Hurricanes  (See also Disaster
Administrative fees .... . 121, 122,H.R. 10 plans ................ . 75 Separate residences in and relief) ..................... . 169
199alimony payments ..... . 133HAMP: Casualty loss due to ....... . 166
Age 591/2 for distribution .... . 128Taxes and insurance premiumsHome affordable modification:
Exception to rule ......... . 128as alimony ............ . 132Pay-for-performance ...... . 90
Age 701/2:Main home, defined ........ . 106Handicapped persons  (See I Contributions cut off at ... . 122Office ..................... . 196Disabilities, persons with) Icons, use of ................... . 3 Distributions requiredPoints ..................... . 96Hawaii: Identification number, qualifying at ................ . 127, 129Possession before finalStandard meal allowance ... . 176 person ................... . 214 Compensation, defined ..... . 121settlement, rent not deductibleHead of household ........... . 19 Illegal activities: Contribution limits .......... . 121as interest ............... . 152Cost of keeping up home .... . 23 Reporting of ................ . 93 Age 50 or older, ......... . 121Repossession ............. . 107Worksheet ............... . 23 Impairment  (See Disabilities, Under age 50, ........... . 121Security system ........... . 200Filing requirements (Table persons with) Contributions ............. . 7, 21Settlement fees ............ . 1081-1) ..................... . 21 Impairment-related work Designating year for whichTax home, determination forHow to file ................. . 21 expenses ................. . 195 contribution is made ... . 122travel-related businessQualifying person ........... . 21 Excess ................. . 128Improvements:expenses ............... . 173Qualifying person to file as ... . 23 Filing before contribution isReal estate, adjustments to basisTenants in common, taxes andSummary (Table 2-1) ..... . 22 made ................. . 122for ....................... . 96insurance premiums asQualifying surviving spouse with Nondeductible ........... . 124Rental property (See Rentalalimony ................. . 132dependent child .......... . 23 Not required annually .... . 122income and expenses)Home equity loans:Health: Roth IRA contribution for sameIncidental expenses:Car purchased by .......... . 182Flexible spending year .................. . 130Business-related gifts ...... . 179Interest deduction .......... . 150arrangement ............. . 47 Time of ................. . 121Travel-related ............. . 175Proceeds invested in tax-exemptHealth insurance (See also Withdrawal before filing duesecurities, interest not Income  (See also Alimony; WagesAccident insurance) ....... . 46 date .................. . 126deductible ............... . 152 and salaries) .. . 45-53, 85-94, 91Reimbursement Cost basis ............ . 124, 127Home improvement loans ... . 153 Bartering ................... . 85arrangement ............. . 47 Deduction for ............ . 7, 122Canceled debts ............. . 85Home office:Savings account ............ . 47 Participant covered by employerConstructive receipt of ... . 11, 61Capital gains exclusion ..... . 111Health coverage tax credit .... . 7, retirement plan (TableTravel to another work Excess reimbursement of medical251 17-1) ................. . 122location ................. . 181 expenses ............... . 144Health insurance: Participant not covered by
Gross ...................... . 31Homebuyer credit ........... . 250Auto insurance policy covering, employer retirement plan
Illegal activities ............. . 93Recapture ................. . 112not deductible as medical (Table 17-2) ........... . 122
Interest .................... . 55Homeowners' associations:expense ................ . 142 Phaseout ............... . 123
Investment income ......... . 209Charges .................. . 149Premiums: Definition of ............... . 121
Jury duty pay ............... . 93Deductible as medical Deductibility (Table Distributions:
expense .............. . 142 22-1) ................. . 147 Life insurance proceeds ..... . 86 At age 591/2 ............. . 128

Page 283 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Withdrawals ........... . 126, 128 Health insurance: Investments:Individual retirement
Classes as travelEarly (See Early withdrawal Deductible as medicalarrangements (IRAs)
expenses ............... . 177from deferred interest expense .............. . 142Distributions: (Cont.)
Expenses ................. . 156account) Self-employed persons,Required minimum distributions
Fees ...................... . 198Required (See this heading: deductible ............. . 145(See this heading: Required
Property:Required distributions) Liability ................... . 196distributions)
As capital asset .......... . 103Withholding ........ . 13, 39, 127 Life .................... . 34, 200Divorced taxpayers ........ . 126 Definition ............... . 155Individual taxpayer identification Life insurance ............. . 142Early distributions (See Early Like-kind exchanges ..... . 101numbers (ITINs) ........ . 12, 35 Alimony ................. . 132withdrawal from deferred Seminars ................. . 200Individual taxpayers  (See Single Medical .................... . 34interest account) Involuntary conversion  (See alsotaxpayers) Paid in advance ............ . 56Employer retirement plan Condemnation ofInformation returns  (See alsoparticipants ......... . 122, 123 Public safety officers ........ . 74 property) .................. . 166Form 1099; Form W-2) ...... . 11, Rental expenses, deduction ofEstablishing account ....... . 121 Basis computation .......... . 9713, 39, 42, 45, 46, 49 premiums paid inTime of ................. . 121 Basis for depreciation ....... . 97Partnerships to provide ...... . 87 advance ................. . 67Where to open account ... . 121 IRAs  (See Individual retirementInheritance  (See also Estate Insurance proceeds:Excess contributions ....... . 128 arrangements (IRAs))beneficiaries) ............ . 91, 98 Dividends, interest on ....... . 56Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet Israel:Adjusted basis for ........... . 98 Installment payments ....... . 6017-1) ................... . 123 Contributions to charitableHolding period, determination Life ........................ . 60Forms to use: organizations in ...... . 158, 161of ...................... . 105 Interest:Form 1099-R for reporting Itemized deductions:IRAs (See Individual retirement Fees to collect ............. . 198distributions ........ . 43, 127 Adjusted gross incomearrangements (IRAs)) Frozen deposits ............ . 57Form 8606 for nondeductible limiting .................. . 150Not taxed .................. . 92contributions .......... . 120 Usurious ................... . 57 Changing from standard toInheritance tax:Inherited IRAs ..... . 92, 124, 125 Interest income .............. . 55 itemized deduction (or viceDeductibility of ............. . 150Required distributions .... . 127 Children: versa) .................. . 139Deduction ................. . 150Interest on, treatment of .... . 120 Gifts to children .......... . 209 Choosing to itemize .... . 138, 139Injured spouse .............. . 14 Dividends as ............... . 63Married couples (See this Form 1040 to be used ..... . 8, 88Claim for refund ............ . 14heading: Spousal IRAs) Form 1099-INT .......... . 11, 43 Limits on ............... . 21, 201Inmate ...................... . 214 Frozen deposits, from ....... . 93Modified adjusted gross income Married filing separately ..... . 21,Innocent spouse relief:(MAGI): Property purchase financed 139Form 8857 ................. . 20 without adequate statedComputation of .......... . 123 One spouse hasJoint returns ................ . 20 interest, treatment of ..... . 100Effect on deduction if covered itemized .............. . 137Insider stock compensation from Recovery of income, on ..... . 88by employer retirement plan Recovery .................. . 88expatriated corporation: Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A,(Table 17-1) ........... . 122 Standard deduction to beTax on .................... . 203 or 1040EZ ................. . 7Effect on deduction if not compared with ........... . 139
Insolvency: Form 1040EZ filingcovered by employer State tax, for .............. . 139
Canceled debt not deemed to be threshold ................ . 7retirement plan (Table Itinerant workers:income .................. . 86 Savings bonds (See also U.S.17-2) ................. . 122 Deduction of expenses ..... . 184
Financial institution's insolvency savings bonds) ........... . 93Worksheet 17-1 ......... . 123 Tax home, determination
causing deductible loss ... . 104 Securities, Form 1040 to beNondeductible of ...................... . 173
Reporting of ............. . 172 used ....................... . 8contributions ............ . 124 ITINs  (See Individual taxpayer
Installment agreements ...... . 15 Tax refunds, from ........... . 16Early withdrawal ......... . 128 identification numbers (ITINs))
Installment sales ........... . 100 Interest payments  (See alsoTax on earnings on ...... . 124
Capital gains and .......... . 113 Mortgages) ..... . 71, 87, 150-157Ordinary income, distributions
JHome sale ................ . 111 Allocation of interest according toas ...................... . 127
Jewelry:use of loan .............. . 156Insulin:Penalties .................. . 127
As capital assets ........... . 103Canceled debt including ..... . 85Deductibility as medicalEarly distributions (See Early
expense ................ . 142 Car loans ................. . 182 Job  (See also headings startingwithdrawal from deferred
with ``Employee'' orDeductions:Insurance:interest account)
``Employer'') ............ . 38, 172Forms to use (TableAccident (See Accident insurance)Excess contributions ..... . 128
Search:23-1) ............. . 156, 157Alimony deduction for, when homeForm 8606 not filed for
Expenses ............... . 196owned as tenants in Not allowed ............. . 156nondeductible
common ................ . 132 Job search:Reporting of ............. . 157contributions ...... . 120, 124
Casualty or theft loss, Deduction of expenses forInvestment interest ......... . 155Overstatement of nondeductible
reimbursement to adjust Interviews ................ . 93Limit on deduction ....... . 155contributions .......... . 124
loss .................... . 169 Joint accounts ............... . 55Personal interest notProhibited transactions ... . 127
Distributions from, reporting Dividends, reporting of ...... . 63deductible ............... . 156Required distributions, failure to of ....................... . 66 Reporting of deductions .... . 157 Joint return of parents:take .............. . 126, 129 Dividends: Student loan interest Investment income of certainProhibited transactions ..... . 127 Interest on ............... . 66 deduction ............... . 134 children ................. . 205Recharacterization of Form 1099-R to report Student loans deduction ...... . 7, Joint return test  (See Qualifyingcontribution ............. . 126 benefits .................. . 43 21, 156 child)Reporting of: Life (See also Group-term life Unstated interest ....... . 95, 100 Joint returns:Distributions ............. . 127 insurance; Life Interference with business Accounting period ........... . 20Filing requirements (Table insurance) ............ . 39, 47 operations: After separate return ........ . 211-3) ..................... . 7 Living expenses paid by, possible Damages as income ........ . 91 Carryover of capital loss .... . 114Recharacterization of income from ............. . 169 Deceased spouse ........... . 20Internal Revenue Service (IRS):contributions .......... . 126 Reimbursements: Dependents on ............. . 31Fraud or misconduct of employee,Required distributions ...... . 125, From casualty insurance .. . 91 Divorced taxpayers ......... . 20reporting anonymously ...... . 2126 State insurer delinquency Estimated tax ............... . 41Mission of .................... . 3Excess accumulations ... . 129 proceedings preventing Excess social security/railroadUnderpayment penalties,Retirement savings contribution minimum pension retirement tax withholdingcomputation by ........... . 44credit ................ . 21, 249 distributions .............. . 80 credit ................... . 252International employment  (SeeSelf-employed persons ..... . 121 Trade of policies and Extension for citizens outsideForeign employment)Spousal IRAs .... . 120, 121, 122, annuities ................ . 101 U.S. ..................... . 10International organizations,123 Withholding against Filing status ................ . 20employees of .............. . 50Taxability ................. . 128 benefits .................. . 13 Form 1040EZ, use of .......... . 7Internet:Distributions ............. . 127 Insurance agents: Fraud penalty .............. . 19Electronic filing over (See E-file)Time of taxation ........... . 121 Deduction of expenses ..... . 184 Guardian of spouse, signingStandard meal allowanceTransfers permitted ........ . 124 Insurance companies: as ....................... . 20rates .................... . 176To Roth IRAs ........ . 125, 126 State delinquency proceedings, Injured spouse .............. . 14Inventory, retail ............. . 103Trustee administrative IRA distributions not made due Innocent spouse ............ . 20
Investment income:fees .................... . 199 to ...................... . 129 Nonresident or dual-status alien
Children ................ . 55, 63Trustee-to-trustee Insurance premiums: spouse .................. . 20
transfers ................ . 125 Investment property:Alimony when spouse owns life Pensions or annuities ....... . 75
IRA to Roth IRA ......... . 131 insurance policy ......... . 132 Rental property (See Rental Worksheet ............... . 78
Types of .................. . 121 Casualty insurance ......... . 96 income and expenses) Personal exemption ......... . 24

Page 284 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Demutualization of Gambling (See Gambling winnings Married taxpayers  (See also JointJoint returns: (Cont.)
companies .............. . 101 and losses) returns; Married filing separately;Responsibility for ........... . 20
Spouse; Tenants by theRecords of ................ . 168Form 1099-R for surrender ofSeparate return after joint .... . 21
entirety) ........ . 7, 20, 21, 63, 75Theft (See also Theftpolicy for cash ............ . 86Signing ................. . 13, 20
losses) .... . 166, 167, 197, 199 Age 65 or older spouse:Social security and railroad Premiums ................. . 200
retirement benefits ........ . 84 Standard deduction ...... . 138Lost property ............... . 200Not deductible ........... . 142
State and local income taxes, When deemed casualty Blind spouse:Proceeds .................. . 60
deduction of ............. . 146 loss .................... . 167 Standard deduction ...... . 138As income ............... . 86
Judges, federal: Lotteries and raffles  (See also Child and dependent carePublic safety officers who died or
Employer retirement plan Gambling winnings and credit ................... . 215were killed in line of duty, tax
coverage ................ . 123 losses) ..................... . 92exclusion ................ . 87 Deceased spouse (See also
Jury duty pay ................ . 93 No charitable deduction for Surviving spouse) .... . 4, 5, 19,Surrender of policy for
tickets .............. . 158, 161 20cash ..................... . 86
Lump-sum distributions ..... . 77 Definition of spouse for purposesWithholding ................ . 39
10-year tax option ........... . 77K of alimony ............... . 132Life insurance premiums ..... . 34
Capital gain treatment ....... . 77Keogh plans  (See also Retirement Dual-status alien spouse .... . 20Life-care fees: Cost calculation ............ . 77plans) ................... . 74, 75 Estimated tax ............... . 41Paid to retirement home and Election of ................. . 77Kickbacks ................... . 93 Filing status ............ . 4, 5, 19designated for medical care, Form 4972 ................. . 77Kiddie tax  (See Children, Form 1040EZ, use of .......... . 7deductibility ............. . 142 Net unrealized appreciationsubheading: Investment income Gross income filing requirementsLifetime learning credit: (NUA) ................... . 77of) (Table 1-1) ............... . 21Married filing separately ..... . 21 Rollovers of ................ . 77Kidnapped children ......... . 238 IRAs .................. . 121, 122Like-kind exchanges ........ . 101 Taxable and tax-free parts ... . 77Losses due to ransom ...... . 167 Spouse covered by employerBasis for depreciation ....... . 98 Luxury travel:Qualifying child ............. . 26 plan .............. . 122, 123Qualifications ............... . 97 Travel expenses when incidentalQualifying relative ........... . 30 Living apart ................ . 19Sale of home .............. . 111 business activities ....... . 176 Medical and dentalLimit on credit .............. . 224 Work-related education, deduction expenses ............... . 140Limits: of expenses ............. . 194L Deceased spouse'sDeductibility of mortgageLabor unions: expenses ............. . 141insurance premiums ..... . 155Collective bargaining Nonresident alien spouse .... . 12,Itemized deductions ........ . 201 Magreements .............. . 39 20Miscellaneous M&IE (Meals and incidentalContributions to, no charitable Performing artists .......... . 189deductions .............. . 196 expenses)  (See also Incidentaldeduction for ............ . 158 Roth IRAs ................. . 130Line of credit for home: expenses; Meal and lodgingDues and fees .......... . 93, 161 Signatures when spouse unable toInterest ................... . 150 expenses) ... . 174, 175, 182, 186Sick pay withholding under union sign ..................... . 13Liquidating distributions ..... . 65 Machinery  (See alsoagreements .............. . 39 Social security or railroadTools) .................... . 181Strike and lockout benefits ... . 94 Living expenses: retirement benefits,Trips from union hall to place of Rental for rental property .... . 68Insurance paying, possible income taxability ................. . 81work .................... . 181 MACRS (Modified Acceleratedfrom .................... . 169 Transfer of home toUnemployment compensation Cost Recovery System):Loans  (See also Debts; Student spouse ................. . 108payments from ........... . 90 Rental property:loans) ........... . 7, 17, 134, 156 Transfers betweenLand  (See also Real estate) .. . 95 Alternative minimum tax ... . 71Fees for, not deductible .... . 156 spouses ............. . 98, 102Depreciation not allowed MAGI  (See Modified adjusted grossHome improvement loans .. . 153 Travel expenses forfor ....................... . 70 income (MAGI))Home mortgages (See Mortgages) spouse ................. . 175Landlords  (See Rental income and Mailing returns  (See Tax returns)Origination fees (See Points) Mass transit passes,expenses) Maintenance of rental propertyRetirement plans, from ...... . 75 employer-provided ........ . 48Landscaping: (See Rental income andLobbying: Maternity clothes:Cost of, when casualty or theft expenses)Contributions for, not charitable Not deductible as medicalloss involved ........ . 167, 168 Making Work Pay Credit .... . 252deductions .......... . 158, 161 expense ................ . 142Larceny: Mandatory retirement age ... . 223Lobbying expenses ......... . 200 MCC (Mortgage creditLosses due to ............. . 167 Market discount bonds ..... . 104Local assessments: certificate) ................ . 248Late filing ..................... . 2 Married child ............... . 238Adjusted basis for ........... . 96 Meal and lodgingPenalties ................ . 10, 18 Married dependents, filing jointDeductibility of ............. . 148 expenses ............. . 175-179Late payment: return .................. . 25, 28Rental property, deductions 50% deduction forPenalties on tax payments ... . 18 Married filing a jointfor ....................... . 67 business-relatedPublic utility charges, not return .................... . 235 meals .......... . 175, 176, 178Local government employees:deductible ............... . 156 Married filing separately ..... . 20, Figure 26-A summary ofSection 457 plans for employeesLaundry: 234 rules .................. . 178(See Section 457 deferredBusiness-related travel Carryover of capital loss .... . 114compensation plans) Work-related education ... . 194expense ............ . 174, 175 Community property states .. . 21Local income taxes, itemized Business-related entertainmentLavish or extravagant Credits, treatment of ........ . 21deductions ............... . 139 including ............ . 175, 179expenses ................. . 179 Deductions:Local law violated ........... . 31 Business-related travel expenseLaw enforcement officers: Changing method from or to including ............ . 174, 175Lockout benefits ............. . 94Life insurance proceeds when itemized deductions .... . 139 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fillLodges  (See Social clubs)death in line of duty ....... . 87 Treatment of ............. . 21 out ..................... . 188Lodging  (See Meal and lodgingLead-based paint removal: Earned income credit ....... . 21 Lodging ............... . 174, 176expenses)Deductibility as medical Gross income filing requirements Proof of expenses ......... . 182expense ................ . 142 Long-term care insurance (Table 1-1) ............... . 21 Table 26-2 summary ..... . 183contracts .................. . 52Leased property: How to file ................. . 21 RecordkeepingChronically ill individual ...... . 52,Casualty or theft loss ....... . 168 Itemized deductions ..... . 21, 139 requirements ........ . 175, 18287Leased vehicles: One spouse has itemized so Reporting of ............... . 184Deductibility of medicalCar expenses ............. . 182 other must as well ..... . 137expense ................ . 142 Table 26-3 showing forms to beLeases  (See Rental income and Joint state and local income taxes used .................. . 187Exclusion, limit of ........... . 52expenses) filed, but separate federal Restaurant receipts ........ . 183Qualified services defined ... . 52Legal expenses ......... . 198, 200 returns .................. . 146 Standard mealLong-term debtLiability insurance: Medical and dental allowance ...... . 175, 176, 186instruments .............. . 104Reimbursements from ....... . 91 expenses ............... . 140
Amount of ............... . 176Long-term gains and losses  (SeeLicense fees: Rollovers ................... . 21
Areas outside continentalCapital gains or losses)Deductibility of ............. . 150 Social security and railroad
U.S. .................. . 176Losses  (See also Gains andNondeductibility of ......... . 200 retirement benefits ........ . 82
Prorating on partial days oflosses; Passive activity) ..... . 17, State and local incomeLife insurance  (See also
travel ................. . 18621, 71 taxes ................... . 146Accelerated death benefits;
Taking turns paying for meals orCapital (See Capital gains or Student loan interest deductionGroup-term life insurance) .... . 8,
entertainment ........... . 179losses) and ..................... . 13647, 87
Transportation workers ..... . 176Alimony, premiums when spouse Tenants by the entirety, allocationCasualty (See also Casualty
owns policy ............. . 132 of real estate taxes ...... . 148losses) ......... . 166, 197, 199 Deduction limits ......... . 178

Page 285 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Medical and dental Metals, precious  (See Gold and Schedule A (Form 1040) to New York Nonoccupational
expenses ............. . 140-145 silver) deduct ................ . 157 Disability Benefit Fund .... . 146
Late payment charges, deductionAdjusted gross income and limit of Mexico: Nightclubs:
of ...................... . 150deduction ............... . 140 Contributions to charitable Cover charges, 50% limit on
Lender's charges forAdopted child .............. . 141 organizations in ...... . 158, 161 deduction ............... . 178
services ................. . 153Resident of .............. . 26, 30Alimony payments made to Nobel Prize .................. . 93
More than one borrower (notcover ................... . 132 Mileage deduction for Nominees ................ . 56, 61
spouse), reporting of interestContributions to cover, not work-related education ... . 191 Dividends that belong to someone
deduction ............... . 157deductible as charitable Mileage rates  (See Standard else ..................... . 63
Preparation costs for notes ordonations ............... . 161 mileage rates) Nonaccountable plans fordeeds of trust ........... . 153Damages including ........ . 144 Military  (See Armed forces) employee
Prepayment:Decedent's expenses ...... . 141 reimbursements ...... . 186, 187Military personnel: Allocation of deduction ... . 152Deduction ................. . 140 Noncapital assets ........... . 103Earned income credit ...... . 238
Penalty for, deductionChecklist for deductible NonemployeeMineral royalties ............. . 89 of .................... . 152expenses (Table compensation ............. . 92Ministers  (See Clergy) Points .................. . 15221-1) ................. . 143 Nonrefundable credits ...... . 247Miscellaneous Reported on FormDependent's expenses ..... . 141 Nonresident alien ....... . 214, 235deductions ............... . 195 1098 ................. . 155Determination of date Federal employees buying back Nonresident aliens ............. . 6Proceeds used for business orpaid .................... . 140 sick leave ................ . 52 Due dates .................. . 10investment, deductionDoctor .................... . 140 Outplacement agency fees .. . 46 Estimated tax ............... . 41of ...................... . 157Form 1040, Schedule A, for Missing children: Form 1040EZ, use of .......... . 7Refinancing ............... . 153reporting ................ . 144 Photographs of, included in IRS Individual taxpayer identificationRefund of interest:Future expenses, settlement publications ................ . 2 number (ITIN) ............ . 12Reported on Formincluding ................ . 144 Spouse .................... . 12Mistakes  (See Errors) 1098 ................. . 155Health insurance credit ..... . 251 Joint returns notModified adjusted gross income Treatment of ............ . 152Health insurance premiums (See available ............... . 20(MAGI): Reverse .................. . 152Health insurance) Separated ................ . 22Child tax credit limits ....... . 225 Seller-financed ............ . 111Included expenses: Transfers between spousesIRAs, computation for: Mosques  (See Churches, temples,Individuals covered ...... . 140 when one spouse isEffect on deduction if covered etc.)Meals and lodging related to nonresident alien ...... . 102by employer retirement plan Motels  (See Hotels)receiving medical care ... . 143, Standard deduction ........ . 137(Table 17-1) ....... . 122, 123176 Taxpayer identificationMoth damage:Effect on deduction if not
Medical care, defined ...... . 140 number .................. . 35Not casualty losses ........ . 167covered by employer
Waiver of alien status ....... . 50Physician ................. . 140 Motor vehicles, donationsretirement plan (Table
Purpose of expenses ....... . 140 Nontaxable payments:of ........................ . 16217-2) ................. . 122
Credit for the elderly or theReimbursements, treatment Worksheet 17-1 ......... . 123 Moving expenses:
disabled ................ . 224of ................... . 53, 143 Roth IRAs, computation Standard mileage rates ........ . 1
Work-related .............. . 216 for ...................... . 130 Nontaxable trades  (See Tax-freeMSAs  (See Medical savings
Phaseout (Table 17-3) ... . 129 exchanges)Medical devices: accounts (MSAs))
Worksheet 17-2 ......... . 129Deductibility of ............. . 142 Northern Mariana Islands:Multiple support
Money market certificates .... . 56 Income from .................. . 5Medical insurance  (See Accident agreement ................. . 34
Money market funds ......... . 64insurance) Notary fees .................. . 92Municipal bonds ............. . 60
Not deductible as interest ... . 153Money orders:Medical insurance Museums:
Payment of tax ............. . 14premiums ................. . 34 Notes:Charitable contributionsPenalty if not honored ....... . 14 As obligations ofMedical research organizations: to ...................... . 158 individuals .............. . 104More information  (See Tax help)Charitable contributions Musicians and Discounted .............. . 46, 60to ...................... . 158 Mortgage: entertainers .............. . 197 Received for services ....... . 46Relief ...................... . 85Medical savings accounts (MSAs) Mutual funds ............... . 198 Not-for-profit activities ....... . 91(See also Archer MSAs) ..... . 47, Mortgage credit certificate Adjusted basis of shares .... . 99 Nursery schools  (See Child and93 (MCC) .................... . 248 Allocated expenses ........ . 198 dependent care credit)Additional tax on ........... . 203 Mortgage insurance premiums: Capital gains ............... . 65 Nursing care:Medicare Advantage MSA ... . 93 Basis in property not to Dividends from ............. . 65 Employment taxes for workerMedical expenses paid for include ................... . 96 Exempt-interest dividends ... . 65 providing medical care,decedent from ......... . 141 Definition .................. . 153 Nonpublicly offered ........ . 198 deductibility of ........... . 142Form 1098 reporting ....... . 155Medicare  (See also Social security Publicly offered ............ . 198 For healthy baby, not deductibleSchedule A (Form 1040) toand Medicare taxes) ... . 8, 46, 50 Undistributed capital as medical expense ...... . 142deduct .................. . 157Benefits .................... . 90 gains ................... . 113 Wages for, deductibility as medicalMortgage interest credit ..... . 248Medicare A, when deductible as Credit for tax on ......... . 250 expense ................ . 142Carryforward .............. . 248medical expense ........ . 143
Nursing homes:Form 8396 ................ . 152Medicare Advantage MSA (See
Insurance for care in (SeeHow to take ............... . 248Medical savings accounts N Long-term care insuranceRecapture ................. . 248(MSAs)) Name change ............. . 12, 43 contracts)Reduced deduction ........ . 248Medicare B, when deductible as Nanny tax  (See Domestic help) Meals and lodging, deductible asMortgages  (See alsomedical expense ........ . 143 National Housing Act: medical expense ........ . 143Points) ................ . 152, 157Medicare D, when deductible as Mortgage assistance .... . 90, 152 Nutrition Program for theAlimony, payments as ...... . 132medical expense ........ . 143
National of the United Elderly .................... . 90Assistance payments ... . 90, 152Medicare tax ................ . 203 States ..................... . 26Assumption of .............. . 95 Nutritional supplements:Medicare taxes, not Fees not included in Native Americans  (See Indians) Not deductible as medicalsupport ................... . 34 basis .................. . 96 expense ................ . 142Negligence penalties ......... . 18Medications: Credit certificate (MCC) from state Net investment income ..... . 155Deductibility as medical or local government ...... . 152 Net operating losses:expense ................ . 142 Discounted mortgage loan ... . 85 OCasualty or theft losses ..... . 172Member of household or Ending early, treatment of OASDI ....................... . 90Refund of carryback ......... . 17relationship test ........... . 30 points ................... . 153 Occupational taxes ......... . 197New Jersey NonoccupationalMembers of the uniformed Federally subsidized mortgage, Deduction of:Disability Benefit Fund .... . 146services or Foreign recapture of tax paid on home Taxes that are deductible (TableNew Jersey UnemploymentService ................... . 110 purchased with .......... . 248 22-1) ................. . 147Compensation Fund ...... . 146Membership fees  (See specific Interest: Office rent, deductibilityNew job, trade, or business:type of organization) Definition ............... . 150 of ........................ . 197Employment agency fees ... . 196Mentally incompetent persons Form 1098 (interest Office, use of home as ...... . 196Job search expenses ...... . 196(See also Disabilities, persons statement) ......... . 71, 155
Offset against debts ....... . 9, 14Travel expenses ........... . 196with; Elderly or disabled, credit Refund of ................ . 87
Work-related education OID  (See Original issue discountfor) ................... . 8, 51, 74 Interest credit (See Mortgage
expenses ............... . 193 (OID))Signing of return by interest credit)
court-appointed Interest deduction: New motor vehicle taxes .... . 147, Oil, gas, and minerals:
representative ............ . 13 Sale of home ............ . 152 149, 150 Future production sold ...... . 89

Page 286 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pass-through entities ....... . 198 Willful failure to file .......... . 19 Phaseout .................. . 21Oil, gas, and minerals: (Cont.)
Withholding ............. . 38, 40 Spouse's exemption ........ . 24Royalties from .............. . 89 Patents:
Schedule C or C-EZ ...... . 89 Infringement damages ...... . 91 Pennsylvania Unemployment Personal injury suits:
Sale of property interest ..... . 89 Compensation Fund ...... . 146Royalties ................... . 89 Damages from .............. . 91
Older taxpayers: Pensions  (See also Annuities;Patronage dividends ......... . 66 Personal interest:
Credit for the elderly ....... . 221 Railroad retirement benefits; Not deductible ............. . 156Payment of tax ... . 2, 9, 14, 15, 17
Rollovers) ..... . 74-81, 75, 77, 81Online help: By check or money order ..... . 2, Personal property  (See also
457 plans (See Section 457EITC Assistant ............ . 233 14, 42 Casualty losses) ........... . 170
deferred compensation plans)By credit card ................ . 2Online Payment Agreement As capital assets ........... . 103
Clergy ..................... . 49By credit or debit card .... . 10, 14application ................ . 15 Rental income from ......... . 88
Contributions:By electronic means:Options .................. . 49, 65 Taxes (See Personal propertyRetirement savings contributionCredit card ............... . 42Charitable contributions, date taxes)credit .............. . 21, 249Credit or debit card ....... . 14of ...................... . 163 Theft of (See Theft losses)Taxation of ............... . 49Electronic Federal Tax PaymentOrdinary dividends  (See Personal property taxes:Cost computation ........... . 75System (EFTPS) .... . 14, 42Dividends) Car taxes ................. . 182Decedent's unrecoveredFunds withdrawal ...... . 14, 42Ordinary gain ............... . 103 Deduction of ............... . 149investment in ............. . 13Delivery services ............. . 9 Schedule A, C, E, or F (FormOrdinary gain and loss  (See Definition of ............. . 79, 80Estimated tax ............ . 15, 42 1040) ................. . 150Gains and losses) Disability pensions .......... . 51Installment agreements (See Taxes (See Personal propertyOrgan donors: Early distributions:Installment agreements) taxes)Deductibility of medical Exceptions to tax on ...... . 79Late payment penalties ...... . 18 Personal representatives  (Seeexpense ................ . 142 Qualified retirement plans,Payable to ''United States Fiduciaries)Original issue discount exceptions for .......... . 79Treasury`` .................. . 2 Persons with disabilities  (See(OID) ...................... . 60 Tax on ................... . 79Vouchers .................. . 42 Disabilities, persons with)Adjusted basis and .......... . 99 Elective deferral limitation ... . 49Payments .............. . 203, 204Discounted debt Phaseout of exemptions ..... . 24Employer plans:Disaster relief .............. . 90instruments ............. . 104 Photographs:Benefits from previousPayroll deductions ...... . 149, 164Form 1099-OID ............. . 43 Casualty or theft lossemployer's plan ....... . 123Withholding (See alsoOrigination fees  (See Points) claims .................. . 169Rollover to IRA ...... . 125, 131Withholding) .............. . 36Other taxes ................. . 202 Physical examination ....... . 142Situations in which noPayroll taxes  (See also SocialOut of work ................. . 221 coverage ............. . 123 Physician certification ...... . 221security and Medicare taxes; Estimated tax ............... . 75Outplacement services ...... . 46 Physician's statement ...... . 221Withholding) ............. . 36, 46 Excess accumulation, tax on (SeeDeduction of agency fees .... . 46 Veterans .................. . 223Peace Corps allowances ..... . 50 also this heading: RequiredOverpayment of tax  (See also Tax Place for filing ............. . 4, 15Penalties: distributions) .......... . 79, 80refunds) .................... . 13 Plants and trees:Accuracy-related ............ . 18 Foreign employmentOverseas work  (See Foreign Cost of, when casualty or theftAlimony deduction, failure to contributions ............. . 75employment) loss involved ........ . 167, 168provide social security number Form 1099-R ............... . 43Over-the-counter drugs: Plastic surgery:of recipient .............. . 134 General Rule for nonqualifiedNot deductible as medical Not deductible as medicalBackup withholding ......... . 40 plans and qualified plans forexpense ................ . 142 expense whenCheck not honored .......... . 14 recipients over 75 years ... . 76Overtime pay ................ . 38 cosmetic ................ . 142Civil penalties .............. . 18 Inherited pensions .......... . 92Oxygen equipment and oxygen: Criminal .................... . 19 Plug-in electric drive motorJoint returns ................ . 75Deductibility as medical Deductibility ........... . 156, 200 vehicle credit ............. . 249Loans from plan ............ . 75expense ................ . 142 Defenses .................. . 18 Plug-in electric vehicleLump-sum distributions (See alsoEstimated tax (See this heading: credit ..................... . 249Lump-sum distributions) ... . 77Underpayment of estimated tax) Points ...................... . 152Military (See Armed forces)P Failure to include social security Basis in property not toMultiple pension plannumber ............... . 12, 19Paper vs. electronic return  (See include ................... . 96benefits ............... . 74, 75Failure to pay tax ........... . 18E-file) Definition .................. . 152Partly taxable payments ..... . 75Failure to provide social securityPaperwork Reduction Act of Excess points ............. . 153Reporting of ................ . 75number or TIN:1980 ......................... . 2 Form 1098 reporting ....... . 155Required distributions:Alimony deduction ....... . 134Parental responsibility  (See Limits on deduction ........ . 153At age 701/2 .............. . 80Home seller andChildren) Excise tax for failure to take Main home purchase, specialpurchaser ............. . 157Parents who never married .. . 28 minimum distributions ... . 80 treatment of .............. . 96To dividend payers ....... . 63 Form 5329 for failure to receive Mortgage ending early ..... . 153Parents, divorced or Form 8606 not filed for required minimum, ...... . 80 Paid by seller .............. . 153separated ............. . 27, 239 nondeductible IRA State insurer delinquency Refinancing ............... . 153Divorced parents .......... . 240 contributions ........ . 120, 124 proceedings preventing Schedule A (Form 1040) toParking fees: Fraud ................... . 18, 19 minimum distributions ... . 80 deduct .................. . 157Business-related travel ..... . 182 Frivolous tax submission .... . 19 State and local government Second home ............. . 153Commuting expense ....... . 181 Interest on ................. . 15 employees (See Section 457 Settlement statement shows asEmployer-provided fringe benefit: IRAs ...................... . 127 deferred compensation plans) charged for mortgage .... . 153Exclusion from income .... . 48 Early distributions ........ . 128 Unrecovered investmentMedical-related travel ...... . 143 Political campaignExcess contributions ..... . 128 in ....................... . 199Sports arena, business-related expenses ................. . 200Form 8606 not filed for Withholding ...... . 13, 39, 75, 77entertainment subject to 50% Political contributions  (Seenondeductible Pentagon attacks  (See Terroristlimit .................... . 178 Campaign contributions)contributions ...... . 120, 124 attacks)Parks and recreation facilities: Political conventions:Overstatement of nondeductible Per capita taxes:Charitable contributions Travel expenses ........... . 177contributions .......... . 124 Deductibility of ............. . 150to ...................... . 158 Ponzi-type investmentRequired distributions, failure to Per diem:Parochial school tuition: schemes ................. . 167take .................. . 126 Allowance orNo charitable deduction .... . 161 Late filing ............... . 10, 18 Post office employees:reimbursement ...... . 185, 186Partners and Exception ................ . 18 Rural mail carriers ......... . 181Charitable organization service,partnerships .............. . 198 Late payment ............... . 18 Postponed tax deadlines:for ...................... . 160Capital gains or losses Negligence ................. . 18 Disaster areas ............. . 172Federal rate ............... . 186from .................... . 113 Reportable transaction Postponement of gain:High-low rate method toIncome .................... . 87 understatements .......... . 18 Sale of home .............. . 108compute ................ . 186Investment interest ......... . 155 Roth IRAs: Adjusted basis ............ . 97Standard meal allowance ... . 176Related party Conversion contributions Power of attorney ......... . 13, 20Performing artists:transactions ............. . 102 withdrawn in 5-year Preferred stock:Business expenses ........ . 189Passive activity ............. . 100 period ................ . 131 Redeemable at a premium ... . 65Work-related educationLosses ................. . 21, 156 Excess contributions ..... . 130
Pregnancy test kit .......... . 142expenses ............... . 195Exception for real estate Substantial understatement of
Premature distributions  (SeePermanent and totalprofessionals ........... . 71 income tax ............... . 18
Early withdrawal from deferreddisability ................. . 221Investment interest and .. . 155 Tax evasion ................ . 19
interest account)Rental property ........... . 71 Tips, failure to report ........ . 54 Personal exemption ...... . 24-35
Prepaid:Reporting of gains or Underpayment of estimated Joint return ................. . 24
losses .................. . 113 tax ........... . 36, 42, 43, 205 Limits ...................... . 21 Insurance .................. . 56

Page 287 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Preparer's fee: Publication 584: Closing costs ............... . 95 Recovery of amounts previously
deducted .................. . 87Casualty and theft losses, Definition of ................ . 95Deductible amount ......... . 197
workbook for ............ . 166 Itemized deductions ......... . 88Division of real estatePreparers of tax returns ...... . 13
taxes ................... . 147Publication 78 .............. . 158 Mortgage interest refund .... . 87Prepayment:
Fair market value (FMV) ..... . 95List of qualified organizations for Over multiple years ......... . 88Insurance premiums:
charitable contributions ... . 157 Form 1099-S to report sale Stolen property, adjustment ofDeductibility as medical
proceeds ............ . 113, 148Publications  (See Tax help) theft loss ................ . 168expense .............. . 143
Holding period, determination Tax refunds ................ . 87Puerto Rico:Mortgage interest (See of ...................... . 105Residents of .................. . 5 Red Cross:Mortgages)
Itemized charges for services notPulitzer Prize ................ . 93 Blood donations notRent paid in advance ........ . 67 deductible ............... . 148 deductible ........... . 158, 161Punitive damages:Prescription medicines: Points .................... . 152 Charitable contributionsAs income ................. . 91Deductibility as medical Progressive deterioration, not to ...................... . 158expense ................ . 142 casualty loss ............ . 167 Redeemable ground rents:Presidential Election Campaign Real estate-related items not Deduction as mortgageQFund ...................... . 12 deductible ............... . 148 interest ................. . 152Qualified dividends ....... . 63, 66Presidentially declared disasters Rental (See Rental income and Redemption of bonds ....... . 100(See Disaster relief) Qualified domestic relations expenses) State and local bonds, beforeorders (QDROs):Prevention of cruelty to children Settlement fees ............. . 95 maturity ................. . 104Rollover of retirement planor animals organizations: Transfer taxes ............. . 149distribution ............... . 78 Redemption of stock ........ . 100Charitable contributions .... . 158 Real estate investment trustsQualified education expenses: Refinancing:Price reduced after (REITs):Work-related education, businesspurchase .................. . 86 Fees for, not part of propertyDividends from ............. . 65deduction ........... . 193-194 basis .................... . 96Principal residence  (See Home) Undistributed capitalQualified Education Programs, Points .................... . 153Prisoner .................... . 214 gains ................... . 113Payments from: Refund of expenses  (See name ofPrivacy Act and paperwork Credit for tax on ...... . 65, 250Form 1099-Q ............... . 43 benefit)reduction information ........ . 2 Real estate taxes:Qualified individuals: Refundable credits .......... . 250Private delivery services ....... . 9 Alimony deduction for, when homeUnder age 65 and retired on Refunds .................... . 203Private schools: owned as tenants inpermanent and total Mortgage interest, treatmentCharitable deduction for common ................ . 132disability ................ . 221 of ...................... . 152tuition ................... . 161 Assessments (See LocalQualified plans  (See also State tax ................... . 87Prizes and awards  (See also assessments)Retirement plans; Taxes (See Tax refunds)Bonuses) ........... . 38, 45, 93 Basis of property and ....... . 95Rollovers) .......... . 74, 77, 125 Regulated investment companies:Exclusion from income ...... . 45 When not reimbursed byQualified student loan  (See Undistributed capital gains, creditproperty seller .......... . 96Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar Student loan interest deduction) for tax on ............... . 250prizes .................... . 93 Cooperative housing (SeeQualified tuition programs ... . 93 Rehabilitative programCooperative housing)Scholarship prizes .......... . 93 Additional tax on ........... . 203 payments .................. . 50deduction of ............... . 146Probationary work periods: Filing requirements (Table Reimbursement  (See also PerList of deductible taxes (TableTravel expenses during ..... . 175 1-3) ....................... . 7 diem; Recovery of amounts22-1) ................. . 147Professional license fees ... . 201 Qualifying child .............. . 26 previously deducted) ... . 87, 185,Schedule A, C, E, or F (FormProfessional Reputation .... . 201 Age test ................... . 236 186, 1881040) ................. . 150Professionals: Joint return test ........ . 236, 238 Accountable plans, definitionRefund, treatment of ....... . 148Entertainment expenses for Of another person ......... . 240 of ...................... . 185Rebates  (See Refunds)attending association Relationship test ........... . 236 Allocation of ............... . 188Recapture:meetings ................ . 179 Residency test ............. . 236 Casualty losses ............ . 169Alimony ................... . 134Profit-sharing plans: Qualifying person: Employee businessReporting on FormForm 1099-R ............... . 43 Child and dependent care expenses ........ . 38, 45, 1781040 ................. . 134Lump sums (See Lump-sum credit ................... . 212 Gain from casualty or theftCredits ....................... . 8distributions) Qualifying relative ........... . 30 loss .................... . 168Filing requirements (TableWithholding ............. . 13, 39 Health insurance, reimbursement1-3) ..................... . 7Promissory notes: in later year ............. . 144New markets credit, filingCharitable contributions, date R Medical and dentalrequirements (Table 1-3) .... . 7of ...................... . 163 Raffles ...................... . 92 expenses ............... . 143Taxes ..................... . 202Proof of business No charitable deduction for Excess reimbursementRecharacterization:expense .................. . 182 tickets .............. . 158, 161 flowchart (FigureIRA contributions .......... . 126Table 26-2 summary ....... . 183 21-A) ................. . 144Railroad retirement Recording fees:Proof of loss ................ . 167 benefits ......... . 75, 81-84, 93 Mileage (See Standard mileageBasis to include ............. . 95Property  (See also Real Deductions related to ....... . 84 rates)Recordkeeping:estate) ................. . 95, 105 Employer retirement plans Personal expenses ........ . 184Gambling ................. . 199Found ..................... . 92 different from ............ . 123 Received after deductingGeneral requirements ...... . 195Stolen ..................... . 93 Equivalent tier 1 (social security loss .................... . 170Sale of home .............. . 108equivalent benefitProstheses: Returning excess for businessSavings bonds used for(SSEB)) ............... . 81, 93Deductibility of medical expenses ............ . 38, 187education ................ . 60Estimated tax ............... . 82expense ................ . 142 Tax year of inclusion for insuranceRecordkeepingForm RRB-1099 ......... . 43, 81 reimbursement .......... . 169Protective clothing .......... . 197 requirements .............. . 16Income ...................... . 7 Theft losses ............... . 169Psychiatric care: Business travelJoint returns ................ . 84 Travel advances ........... . 187Specially equipped medical expenses ........... . 175, 182Lump-sum election .......... . 82 Types of .................. . 169centers, deductibility of Copies of returns ........... . 16Married filing separately ..... . 21,expense ................ . 142 Unclaimed ................ . 194Destroyed records ......... . 18382Public assistance benefits ... . 90 Work-related educationDocumentary evidence ..... . 183Repayment of benefits ...... . 82 expenses ............... . 194Public debt: Electronic records of tips .... . 53Reporting of ................ . 82 Reinvestment plans:Gifts to reduce .............. . 15 Form W-2 .................. . 16Taxability of ............. . 81, 82 Dividends used for .......... . 64Public parks and recreation Gambling .................. . 92Withholding ................ . 39facilities: Related partyIncomplete records ........ . 183Not tax deductible ....... . 149 transactions .............. . 102Charitable contributions Meal expenses:Withholding for ............. . 82to ...................... . 158 Indirect transactions ........ . 102Actual cost .............. . 175Railroad Unemployment Like-kind exchanges ... . 101, 102Public safety officers insurance Standard mealInsurance Act ............. . 52premiums ................. . 74 Multiple property sales orallowance ............. . 175Real estate  (See also Mortgages; trades .................. . 102Public transportation passes, Period of retention ...... . 16, 183Vacation homes) ..... . 68, 69, 70,employer-provided ........ . 48 Relationship test  (See QualifyingTip income ................. . 53105, 150
child)Travel expenses ....... . 175, 182Public utilities  (See Utilities) As noncapital assets ....... . 103
Work-related education Relative, qualifying .......... . 30Publication 1244: Basis ...................... . 95
expenses ............... . 195 Relief fund contributions .... . 201Daily record of tips (Form Canceled business debt,
Records of loss ............. . 1684070A) .................. . 53 treatment of .............. . 86 Relief funds  (See also Disaster
Casualty loss .............. . 170Reporting tips to employer ... . 54 Records to keep ............ . 164 relief) ..................... . 169

Page 288 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Religious organizations  (See also Self-employment tax, when Retirement plans  (See also Direct rollovers ............. . 77
Churches, temples, etc.; applicable ................ . 71 Annuities; Railroad retirement Eligible distributions ......... . 77
Clergy) .......... . 6, 49, 158, 160 benefits; Rollovers; Roth Excess due to incorrect rolloverTax return preparation ....... . 68
IRAs) ........ . 21, 74, 75, 77, 81Charitable contributions information .............. . 128Tax shelters and at-risk
to ...................... . 158 457 plans (See Section 457 From 403 plan to IRA ...... . 125rules ..................... . 71
deferred compensation plans)50% limit on deduction ... . 163 From employer's plan toTime to report .............. . 67 Clergy ..................... . 49Written statement not IRA ..................... . 125Travel expenses associated withneeded ............... . 160 Contributions ............... . 49 From IRA to IRA ........... . 125management and Credit for (See Retirement From IRA to Roth IRA ...... . 131Remainder interest, sale maintenance ............. . 68 savings contribution credit)of ........................ . 111 From Roth IRA to RothVacant rental property ....... . 67 Taxation of ............... . 49 IRA ..................... . 131Rental income: Reorganizations, corporate: Cost computation ........... . 75 From section 457 plan toUncollected rent ............ . 67 Nontaxable trade of stock ... . 101 IRA ..................... . 125Decedent's unrecoveredRental income and Repairs: From SIMPLE IRA to Rothinvestment in ............. . 13expenses ............... . 66-73 Basis, effect on .......... . 95, 96 IRA ..................... . 131Definition of ............. . 79, 80Advance rent ............... . 67
Gain from publicly tradedCost of, when casualty or theft Disability pensions .......... . 51Canceling lease, payments
securities ............... . 106loss involved ............ . 168 Early distributions:for ....................... . 67
Inherited IRAs ............. . 125Rental expenses ............ . 67 Exceptions to tax on ...... . 79Capitalized costs ........... . 67
Lump-sum distributions ...... . 77Tax on ................... . 79Repayment:Change of property to rental
Married filing separately ..... . 21Elective deferral limitation ... . 49use ................... . 68, 99 Amount previously included in Nonspouse beneficiary ...... . 78Employer plans:Deductions .............. . 67, 70 income ................. . 199
Nontaxable amounts ........ . 77Benefits from previousLosses that exceed passive Repayments ................. . 88 Partial rollovers ............ . 125employer's plan ....... . 123income ................ . 71 Social security benefits ... . 82, 89 Qualified domestic relations ordersRollover to IRA ...... . 125, 131Depreciation (See also Unemployment for distribution of retirement planSituations in which noDepreciation) .......... . 67, 70 compensation ......... . 89, 90 funds .................... . 78coverage ............. . 123Dwelling unit not used as Reporting: Reporting:home .................... . 70 Estimated tax ............... . 75Rollovers .................. . 126 From employer's plan toDwelling unit used as Excess accumulation, tax on (SeeRepossession of home ..... . 107 IRA ................... . 126home .................... . 69 also this heading: Required
Requests for information from IRA to IRA .............. . 125distributions) .......... . 79, 80Capital gains exclusion ... . 111 IRS ........................ . 16 Retirement bondForeign employmentComputation of income and
redemption ............... . 78Required minimum distributions contributions ............. . 75expenses .............. . 70
(See also Individual retirement Roth IRAs .................. . 79Days used for repairs and Form 1099-R ............... . 43
arrangements (IRAs); Surviving spouse ........... . 78maintenance ........... . 70 General Rule for nonqualified andPensions) ......... . 80, 125, 126 Taxability ............. . 125, 129Determining if used as qualified plans for recipients
Rescue squad members: Time limits (60-day rule) .... . 125home .................. . 69 over 75 years ............ . 76
Treatment of .............. . 125Life insurance proceeds whenDivision of expenses ...... . 70 Inherited pensions .......... . 92
Waiting period between .... . 125death in line of duty ....... . 87Donation of use of IRAs (See Individual retirement
Withholding tax ............. . 77property ............... . 69 Research expenses: arrangements (IRAs))
Roth IRAs  (See alsoFiguring days of personal Joint return ................. . 75College professor .......... . 197
Rollovers) ........ . 129-132, 131use .................... . 69 Keogh plans ................ . 75Reservists:
Age:Limit for rental losses ..... . 71 Loans from plan ............ . 75Deduction for transportation Distributions after ageMain home Lump-sum distributions (See alsoexpense ................ . 180 59 .................... . 131determination .......... . 69 Lump-sum distributions) ... . 77IRAs ...................... . 123 No limit forRented for 15 days or Military (See Armed forces)Repayments ............... . 121 contributions .......... . 130more .................. . 70 Multiple pension planResidency: No required distributionRented for fewer than 15 benefits ............... . 74, 75Home outside U.S. (See Citizens age ................... . 132days ............ . 67, 69, 70 Partly taxable payments ..... . 75outside U.S.) Compensation, defined ..... . 130Shared equity financing Reporting of ................ . 75Main home, defined ........ . 106 Contribution limits .......... . 130agreement ............. . 69 Required distributions ....... . 80 Age 50 or older, ......... . 130Residency test  (See QualifyingEquipment rental for rental At age 701/2 .............. . 80 Under age 50, ........... . 130child)property .................. . 68 Excise tax for failure to take Contributions .............. . 129Expenses paid by tenant .... . 67 Resident aliens: minimum distributions ... . 80 No deduction for ......... . 129Fair rental price ............. . 69 Earned income credit ...... . 235 Form 5329 for failure to receive Roth IRA only ........... . 130Home possession before final Estimated tax ............... . 41 required minimum retirement Time to make ........... . 130settlement, rent not deductible plan distributions ....... . 80IRA distributions, withholding To traditional IRA for sameas interest ............... . 152 State insurer delinquencyfrom .................... . 127 year .................. . 130Improvements .............. . 67 proceedings preventingSocial security number Conversion ................ . 131Defined .................. . 67 minimum distributions ... . 80(SSN) ................... . 12 Definition of ............... . 129Increase due to higher real estate Section 457 plans (See SectionSpouse treated as .......... . 23 Distributions:taxes ................... . 149 457 deferred compensationResidential energy Qualified distributions .... . 131Deductibility (Table plans)credits ................... . 249 Effect of modified AGI on22-1) ................. . 147 State and local governmentResorts: contributions (TableInsurance premiums paid in employees (See Section 457Travel expenses when incidental 17-3) ................... . 129advance ................. . 67 deferred compensation plans)business activities ....... . 176 Establishing account ....... . 129Local assessments ......... . 67 Withholding ...... . 13, 39, 75, 77 Excess contributions ....... . 130Restaurant employees:Losses from rental real estate Retirement savings contribution IRA transfer to ......... . 125, 126activities .............. . 21, 71 Tips (See Tip income) credit ..................... . 249 Modified adjusted gross incomeNot-rented-for-profit Retail installment contracts: Adjusted gross income (MAGI) ................. . 130property .................. . 68 Finance charges, not limit ..................... . 21 Computation (WorksheetPart interest ................ . 67 deductible ............... . 156 Returns, tax  (See Tax returns) 17-2) ................. . 129Part of property rented ...... . 68 Retail inventory ............. . 103 Revenue stamps: Phaseout (Table 17-3) ... . 129Personal property rental ..... . 88 Retention of records  (See Basis to include ............. . 95 Penalties:Personal use of property including Recordkeeping requirements) Reverse Mortgages ......... . 152 Conversion contributionsvacation home ......... . 68, 69 Retired Senior Volunteer Revolving charge accounts: withdrawn in 5-yearAllocation of expenses .... . 67 Program ................... . 51 Finance charges, not period ................ . 131Pre-rental expenses ......... . 67 Retirees  (See also Retirement deductible ............... . 156 Excess contributions ..... . 130Property or services received plans) ...................... . 74 Rewards ..................... . 93 Recharacterizations ........ . 126instead of money ......... . 67 Armed forces: Spousal contributions ...... . 130Rhode Island TemporaryPurchaser's payment of rent, not Taxable income .......... . 50 Disability Benefit Fund .... . 146 Taxability ................. . 131included in property
Withdrawals ............... . 132Withholding .............. . 36 Robbery:basis .................... . 96
Excess contributions ..... . 131Retirement of bonds .... . 100, 104 Losses due to ............. . 167Repairs .................... . 67
Not taxable .............. . 131Rollovers ................ . 77, 125Reporting of ................ . 71 Rollover of amount
Rounding off dollars ......... . 12redeemed ................ . 78 Beneficiaries, restrictions .... . 78Sale of rental property ....... . 67
Royalties .................... . 89Schedule E for reporting of .. . 71 Definition of ............... . 125Retirement planning
Security deposits ........... . 67 services ................... . 48 Designated Roth account .... . 78 Rural mail carriers .......... . 181

Page 289 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule  (See also Form Stock rights: Services:S
1040) ........ . 15, 45, 46, 49, 52 As capital assets ........ . 103 No charitable deduction for valueS corporations .............. . 198 Dividends as ............. . 65Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See Form of ...................... . 158Capital gains or losses 1040) Holding period, determination Property received for ........ . 97from .................... . 113 of .................... . 105K-1: Settlement date of securitiesRelated party Worthless ............... . 100Beneficiaries receiving income transaction ............... . 104transactions ............. . 102 Surrender of stock ......... . 100from estate or trust ...... . 63 Settlement fees:Shareholders ............... . 87 Tax-exempt:Partnership income ....... . 87 Real property transactions ... . 95Investment interest ...... . 155 Home equity loan proceedsS corporation income ..... . 87 Sale of home .............. . 108Safe deposit box ............ . 198 invested in ............ . 152K-1, Form 1041 ............. . 55 Severance pay ............... . 46Salaries  (See Wages and salaries) Interest incurred to produceR (Form 1040A or 1040) .... . 223 Accrued leave payment ..... . 46Sale of home  (See also Real income from ........... . 155X: Outplacement services ...... . 46estate) ......... . 71, 93, 106-112 Interest to purchase or carry,Tax rates for single Shipping:Abandonment ............. . 107 not deductible ......... . 156persons ................ . 20 Business-related travelAdjusted basis ......... . 107, 108 Tenants by the entirety owning,Y-1: expense ................ . 174Amount realized ........... . 107 reporting of dividends ..... . 63Tax rates for married filing Shipwrecks:Basis ..................... . 108 Tenants in common owning,jointly .................. . 20 Casualty loss due to ....... . 166Capital gains exclusion ..... . 109 reporting of dividends ..... . 63Y-2:Division of real estate Short tax year:Worthless securities ........ . 100Tax rates for married filingtaxes ................... . 147 Change in annual accountingSecurity deposits:separately ............. . 21Employer, payment by ..... . 107 period .................. . 137Rental property, for ......... . 67Schedules A±F, R, SE (FormFederal subsidy, recapture Short-term debt instruments:Self-employed persons  (See also1040)  (See Form 1040)of ...................... . 112 Government obligations .... . 103Self-employment tax) ...... . 150Scholarships ......... . 28, 31, 34Foreclosure or Ordinary gain .............. . 103Corporate directors as ....... . 92Scholarships andrepossession ............ . 107 Definition ..................... . 6 Short-term gains andfellowships .................. . 7Form 1099-S .............. . 107 losses ................ . 103, 113Filing requirements (TableEarned income including ... . 138Gain or loss, figuring of ..... . 107 1-3) ....................... . 7 Priority in deducting ........ . 114Exclusion from grossInterest deduction for Foreign government or Sale or trade of property held 1income .................. . 93mortgage ............... . 152 international organizations, U.S. year or less ............. . 104Teaching or researchInterest paid to seller, reporting citizens employed by ........ . 6 Sick leave:fellowships ............... . 93of ...................... . 157 Gross income ................ . 5 Cash payments for unusedScientific organizations:Jointly owned home ........ . 107 Health insurance costs, deductible leave ................... . 143Charitable contributionsLand ...................... . 106 as medical expense ...... . 145 Federal employees buyingto ...................... . 158Main home, defined ........ . 106 Homeworkers, deduction of back ..................... . 52Scrip dividends .............. . 65More than one home ....... . 107 expenses ............... . 184 Sick pay:Second homes  (See VacationOption to buy .............. . 107 IRAs ...................... . 121 FECA payments ............ . 52homes) Meal allowance not permittedPeriod of ownership and Income .................... . 46Second mortgages: when more than 10% ownershipuse ..................... . 109 Railroad Unemployment Insuranceof corporation ........... . 186Interest ................... . 150Points paid by seller ........ . 153 Act ...................... . 52Ministers ..................... . 6Postponed gain from ........ . 97 Section 1202 exclusion: Withholding ................ . 38NonemployeeRecordkeeping ............ . 108 Capital gains or losses Signatures ................... . 13compensation ............ . 92under ................... . 114Reporting of gain .......... . 111 Agent, use of ............... . 13Qualified retirement plansSeller-financed mortgage ... . 111 Section 1244 stock: Joint returns ................ . 20for ....................... . 75Selling price ............... . 107 Losses on ................. . 104 Mentally incompetent ....... . 13Travel outside U.S. ........ . 177Settlement fees or closing Section 1250 gains: Parent for child ............. . 13Work-related educationcosts ................... . 108 Sale of real property subject Physically disabled .......... . 13expenses ............... . 194Trading homes ............ . 108 to ...................... . 114 Signing your return ............ . 9Self-employment tax ........ . 202Transfer to spouse ..... . 108, 110 Section 179 deductions: Silver  (See Gold and silver)Deduction of ............... . 150Undeducted points ......... . 106 Adjustment to basis for ...... . 96 List of deductible taxes (Table SIMPLE plans:Sale of property ......... . 99-106 Car expenses ............. . 182 22-1) ................. . 147 Rollover to Roth IRA ....... . 131Adjusted basis ............. . 100 Section 457 deferred Rental income .............. . 71 Simplified employee pensionsAmount realized ........... . 100 compensation plans ....... . 74 Seller-financed (SEPs):Basis other than cost ....... . 101 Early distributions from ...... . 79 mortgages ................ . 111 IRAs as ................... . 121Business property that has Required distributions ....... . 80 Seminars: Simplified Method:undergone change of Rollovers: Investment-related ......... . 200 Computation of taxableuse ...................... . 99 To IRAs ............. . 125, 131 annuity .................. . 76Senior CompanionCash payment ............. . 101 Section 72(m)(5) ............ . 203 Program ................... . 51 Worksheet ............... . 76Debt payoff included in ..... . 100 Securities  (See also Capital gains;Definition of ............... . 100 Separate returns  (See Married Single taxpayers ............. . 20Dividends) ............. . 62, 112 filing separately)Fair market value (FMV) .... . 100 Charitable contributions to, noAdjusted basis for ........... . 99Figuring gain or loss ....... . 100 deduction for ........ . 158, 161Separated parents ... . 27, 29, 240As capital assets ........... . 103Form 1099-B .............. . 100 Filing requirements ........... . 5Separated taxpayers ......... . 19Bought at various times, how toLike-kind exchanges ....... . 101 Filing status ........... . 5, 19, 20Filing status ............. . 20, 21indicate ................. . 113Personal items ............. . 93 Form 1040EZ, use of ...... . 7, 20IRAs ...................... . 122Claim for refund ............ . 17Redemption of stock ....... . 100 Gross income filing requirementsMedical and dental expenses ofConstructive ownership of stock,Rental property that has (Table 1-1) ................. . 4children of ............... . 141determination of ......... . 102undergone change of Mortgage interest .......... . 152 Small businesses:Convertible stocks anduse ...................... . 99 Nonresident alien spouse .... . 22 Capital gains or losses from stockbonds .................. . 101Transfers between Personal exemption ......... . 24 of ...................... . 114Fractional shares ........... . 65spouses ................ . 102 Keogh plans ................ . 75Separation agreements:Holding period, determinationSales and exchanges: Defined for purposes of Losses on stock of ......... . 104of ...................... . 104Bonds ..................... . 60 alimony ................. . 132 Smoking cessation programs:Joint owners, reporting ofSales tax: SEPs  (See Simplified employee Deductibility as medicaldividends ................ . 63Basis to include ............. . 95 pensions (SEPs)) expense ................ . 142Nontaxable trades ......... . 101Car purchase .............. . 182 Series EE and E savings bonds Social clubs:Options ................. . 49, 65
Sales taxes, standard deduction (See U.S. savings bonds) Contributions to, no charitablePreferred stock, redeemable at aincreased by ............. . 138 deduction for ............ . 158Series HH and H savingspremium ................. . 65
Sales to related persons, bonds ..................... . 57 Dues:Redemption of stock ....... . 100
exception ................. . 111 Not entertainmentSeries I savings bonds ....... . 57Reinvestment plan, dividends
expenses ............. . 179Salvation Army  (See Charitable used for .................. . 64 Service charges ............ . 198
contributions) Social security and MedicareCredit or debit card payment ofRollover of gain from publicly
taxes ................. . 203, 217Saturday, deadline falling taxes .................... . 14traded securities ......... . 106
on ......................... . 41 Reporting of (Table 1-3) ....... . 7Deductibility of ............. . 156Sale expenses, how to adjust
Support, not included in ..... . 34Employer treating as wages for tipSavings: for ...................... . 113
income .................. . 53Bonds .................. . 57, 62 Short-term gains and Social security benefits ...... . 32,
losses .................. . 113 81, 84Bonds used for education .... . 59 Service Corps of Retired
Certificate ............... . 56, 61 Stock appreciation rights .... . 46 Executives (SCORE) ....... . 51 Deductions related to ....... . 84

Page 290 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prorating on partial days of Straddles: Charitable contributions,Social security benefits (Cont.)
travel ................... . 186 deductibility of (TableInterest from ............... . 155Employer retirement plans
24-1) ................... . 157different from ............ . 123 Standard medical mileage Strike benefits ............... . 94
Children's income:Estimated tax ............... . 82 rates ..................... . 140 Student loan interest deduction:
Inclusion on parent's returnForeign employer ........... . 50 Standard mileage rates ..... . 181 Loan repayment
(Figure 31-A) .......... . 206Form SSA-1042S for nonresident 2010 rates ................... . 1 assistance .............. . 136
Investment income more thanaliens .................... . 81 Business-related miles ..... . 172, Student loans: $1,900, reporting of (FigureForm SSA-1099 ......... . 43, 81 181 Cancellation of debt ......... . 86 31-B) ................. . 207Group-term life insurance, taxes Car expenses ............. . 181 Interest deduction ... . 7, 134, 156 Entertainment expenses:owed on ................... . 8 Charitable organization service, Academic period ......... . 135 50% limit (Figure 26-A) ... . 178Income ...................... . 7 auto use for ............. . 160 Amount of deduction ..... . 136 Proof of (Table 26-2) ..... . 183IRAs for recipients of Medical reasons for use of Claiming ................ . 136benefits ................. . 123 Reporting of (Tablecar ..................... . 143 Double deduction notJoint returns ................ . 84 26-3) ................. . 187Not allowed ............... . 182 allowed ............... . 136Lump-sum election .......... . 82 Estimated tax, who must makeWork-related education ..... . 191, Eligible educationalMarried filing separately ..... . 21, payments (Figure 4-A) .... . 41193 institution ............. . 13582 Filing requirements:Eligible student .......... . 135State:Paid by employer ........... . 46 Dependents (Table 1-2) ..... . 5Features of (TableObligations, interest on ...... . 60Repayment of benefits ... . 82, 89 Gross income levels (Table19-1) ................. . 135State bar associations:Repayments ............... . 198 1-1) ..................... . 4Married filing separately ... . 21Bar review courses ........ . 193Reporting of ................ . 82 Other situations requiring filingQualified student loan .... . 135Charitable contributionsTaxability of ............. . 81, 82 (Table 1-3) ............... . 7Worksheet .............. . 136to ...................... . 161Tips, taxes owed on ........... . 8 Gift expenses:Interest, defined ........... . 135State or local governments:Withholding for .......... . 39, 82 Proof of (Table 26-2) ..... . 183Student claimed as exemption onNot deductible ........... . 149 Bonds, tax-exempt ......... . 104 Reporting of (Tabletax return of anotherSocial security number Charitable contributions 26-3) ................. . 187person .................. . 136(SSN) ...................... . 12 to ...................... . 158 Head of household, qualifyingStudents ................... . 164Correspondence with IRS, include Employees: person (Table 2-1) ........ . 22Credit (See Education credits)SSN ..................... . 12 Section 457 plans for (See Individual retirementDefined .................... . 26Dependents ................ . 12 Section 457 deferred arrangements (IRAs):Exemption fromException ................ . 12 compensation plans) Figuring modified AGIwithholding ............... . 38Failure to include penalty .... . 12 Unemployment (Worksheet 17-1) ...... . 123Foreign .................... . 26Form SS-5 to request compensation .......... . 90 Modified AGI, effect on
Foreign students ........... . 160number .................. . 12 deduction if covered byFee-basis officials:
Loans (See Student loans)Nonresident alien spouse .... . 12 retirement plan at work (TableBusiness expenses of .... . 188
Resident aliens ............. . 12 Scholarships (See Scholarships 17-1) ................. . 122Work-related education and fellowships)Social security numbers Modified AGI, effect onexpenses ............. . 195 Tuition programs, qualified (See(SSNs) ................... . 214 deduction if not covered byState or local income Qualified tuition programs)Alimony recipient's number retirement plan at work (Tabletaxes ..................... . 139 Work-related education (Seerequired ................. . 134 17-2) ................. . 122Deduction of ........... . 145, 146 Work-related education)Child's ....................... . 2 Roth IRAs, effect of modifiedList of deductible taxes (TableNumber to be obtained at Substantial gainful AGI on contributions (Table22-1) ................. . 147birth ................... . 35 activity ................... . 221 17-3) ................. . 129Schedule A (FormDependents .................. . 2 Roth IRAs, modified AGISubstitute forms ............. . 111040) ................. . 150Dividend payers to use ...... . 63 (Worksheet 17-2) ...... . 129Suggestions for publication .... . 3Electronic returns filed withEarned income credit ...... . 234, Interest deductions, forms to useSunday, deadline falling on .. . 41federal ..................... . 9238 (Table 23-1) ......... . 156, 157Supplemental wages ......... . 38Exception to deduction ..... . 146Penalty for failure to provide: Meal expenses and 50% limitFederal changes, effect on .. . 18 Supplies:To dividend payers ....... . 63 (Figure 26-A) ............ . 178Form W-2 to show withheld Regularly used or consumed inSocial security card ........ . 234 Medical and dental expenses:taxes ................... . 146 ordinary course of trade orSonic booms: Checklist for deductible expensebusiness ................ . 103Interest on, notCasualty loss due to ....... . 166 (Table 21-1) ........... . 143deductible ............... . 156 Support test: Reimbursement, excessSpecial needs children: Joint state and local returns but Qualifying child ............. . 28 algorithm (FigureAdoption credit ............ . 250 federal returns filed Qualifying relative ........... . 31 21-A) ................. . 144Spouse  (See also Married separately ............... . 146 Surveys: Roth IRA and modified adjustedtaxpayers; Surviving Married filing separately .... . 146 Property basis to include .... . 95 gross income (MAGI) phaseoutspouse) ... . 5, 12, 13, 19, 20, 78, Refunds, treatment of ...... . 146 Surviving spouse: (Table 17-3) ............. . 12986 State or local taxes: Annuity .................... . 80 Student loan interest deductionDisabled, qualifying for dependent Refunds ................... . 87 Filing status ................ . 19 (Table 19-1) ............. . 135care credit .............. . 214
Statute of limitations: With dependent child ...... . 23 Tax returns:Student ................... . 214
Claim for refund ............ . 14 Gross income filing requirements Due dates (Table 1-5) ....... . 9SSN  (See Social security number
(Table 1-1) ................. . 4Claim for refunds ........... . 17 Steps to prepare (Table(SSN))
Life insurance proceeds paid 1-6) ................... . 11Statutory employees ........ . 184Stamp taxes: to ....................... . 86 Taxes that are deductible (TableStillborn child ............... . 26Real estate transactions Rollovers by ................ . 78 22-1) ................... . 147Stock appreciation rights .... . 46and ..................... . 149 Single filing status .......... . 20 Travel and transportationStock bonus plans ........... . 39Stamps  (See Collectibles) expenses:Tax (See Estate tax)Stock certificates:Standard deduction ..... . 137, 139 Examples of deductibleSynagogues  (See Churches,Age 65 or older ............ . 137 Charitable contributions, date expenses (Tabletemples, etc.)Blind persons .............. . 137 of ...................... . 163 26-1) ................. . 174Changing from itemized to Stock options ............. . 49, 65 Local transportation (Figurestandard deduction (or vice Stockholders  (See also 26-B) ................. . 180Tversa) .................. . 139 Securities) ................. . 17 Proof of (Table 26-2) ..... . 183Tables and figures:Comparison with itemized Debts ...................... . 86 Reporting of (TableAdjusted basis, examples ofdeduction amount ........ . 139 Stockholders' meeting 26-3) ................. . 187(Table 13-1) .............. . 96Defined ................... . 137 expenses ................. . 201 Volunteers, deductibility ofAlimony requirementsDependents ............... . 138 Stocks  (See also Dividends; contributions (Table(instruments executed afterFinal return of decedent .... . 137 Securities) .............. . 17, 43 24-2) ................... . 1591984) (Table 18-1) ....... . 133Married filing separately: Work-related education (FigureStolen funds:One spouse has Capital gain rates (Table 27-A) ................... . 192Reporting of ................ . 93itemized .............. . 137 16-1) ................... . 114 Tax computationStolen property  (See Theft losses)Purpose of ................ . 137 Car expenses, reporting of (Table worksheet ................ . 266Stop-smoking programs:Sales taxes ............... . 138 26-3) ................... . 187
Tax counsel fees ........... . 197Deductibility as medical Casualty and theft losses:Standard meal allowance ... . 175,
Tax Counseling for theexpense ................ . 142 Deduction limits for personal176, 186
Elderly ...................... . 9Storms  (See also Disaster property (Table 25-1) .. . 170Amount of ................. . 176
Tax credits  (See Credits)relief) ..................... . 169Areas outside continental Deduction of loss, when to take
U.S. .................... . 176 Casualty loss due to ....... . 166 (Table 25-2) ........... . 171 Tax evasion ................. . 19

Page 291 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax figured by IRS .......... . 203 Request transcript of, Form Taxpayer identification numbers Third parties:
4506-T ................... . 16 (TINs) ................ . 212, 214 Alimony payments madeTax help ............. . 2, 3, 9, 269
Steps to prepare (Table to .................. . 132, 133Child and dependent careTax Counseling for the
1-6) ..................... . 11 credit ................... . 216 Designee for IRS to discuss returnElderly ..................... . 9
Third party designee ........ . 13 with ..................... . 13Childcare provider ......... . 216Volunteer counseling (Volunteer
Transcript of ................ . 16 Income from taxpayer's propertyIndividual (ITIN) ............ . 35Income Tax Assistance
paid to ................... . 11Who must file ............ . 4, 5, 6 Social security numbers (Seeprogram) ............... . 9, 51
Social security numbers Threats:Tax shelters:Tax preference items ....... . 203
(SSNs)) Losses due to ............. . 167Rental property and at-riskTax rates:
rules ..................... . 71 Teachers: Tickets  (See EntertainmentMarried filing jointly (Schedule
Work-related education ..... . 192, expenses)Tax table ............... . 254-265Y-1) ..................... . 20
193 Tiebreaker rules ......... . 28, 238Tax year  (See also AccountingMarried filing separately (Schedule
Telephones ................. . 201periods) .................. . 9, 11Y-2) ..................... . 21 Tip expense:
Business-related travelSingle person filing (Schedule Taxable exchanges: Business meal or entertainment
expense ................ . 174X) ....................... . 20 activity, 50% deductionDefinition of ................ . 97
Fraud or misconduct of IRS limit .................... . 178Tax refunds: Taxes  (See also Sales
employee, number for reporting Business travel expense .... . 174,Agreement with IRS extending tax) .......... . 145-150, 182, 202
anonymously ............... . 2 175assessment period, claim based Alternative minimum ....... . 203
Tax return to include phoneon ....................... . 17 Tip income ............... . 53-55Business taxes, deduction
number .................... . 2Bad debts .................. . 17 Allocated tips ........ . 38, 54, 55of ...................... . 145
Temples  (See Churches, temples,Business tax credit Daily record of tips .......... . 53Deduction of ............... . 146
etc.)carrybacks ............... . 17 Electronic tip record ......... . 53Schedules to use ........ . 150
Temporary absence from job:Cashing check .............. . 14 Form 4070A for dailyTypes of taxes deductible
Work-related education records .................. . 53Check's expiration date ...... . 14 (Table 22-1) ........... . 147
during .................. . 191 Noncash tips ............ . 53, 54Claim for ................ . 16, 17 Estate (See Estate tax)
Temporary absences ..... . 26, 31 Penalty for failure to report ... . 54Limitations period ......... . 17 Estimated (See Estimated tax)
Reporting on tax return ...... . 54Excise (See Excise taxes)Litigation ................. . 17 Temporary job assignments:
Reporting tips to employer ... . 53Federal income taxes, notDirect deposit .............. . 13 Travel expenses ........... . 174
deductible ............... . 150 Failure to report toErroneous refunds .......... . 16 Tenants  (See also Rental income
employer ............ . 8, 54Foreign taxes .............. . 145Federal income tax and expenses) .............. . 67
Form 4070 for ............ . 54Income tax. deductionrefunds .................. . 87 By the entirety .............. . 55
of .................... . 146 Service charges paid by employerFinancially disabled ......... . 17 In common ................. . 55
as wages ................ . 53Gift taxes ................. . 150Foreign tax paid or Tenants by the entirety:
Social security and Medicare tax:How to figure .............. . 202accrued .................. . 17 Alimony, no deduction for taxes Employer reporting for purposesIncome taxes, deductionGeneral rules ................. . 9 and insurance paid on home of ..................... . 53of ...................... . 146Inquiries ..................... . 9 owned as ............... . 132
Filing requirements (TableIndian tribal government taxes,Interest on .......... . 16, 18, 56 Dividends, reporting of ...... . 63 1-3) ..................... . 7deduction of ............. . 145Late filed returns .............. . 2 Real estate taxes, allocation when Uncollected ................ . 8Inheritance tax ............. . 150Less than $1 ............... . 14 filing separately .......... . 148
Tip-splitting or tip-poolingKiddie tax (See Children,Limits ...................... . 17 Tenants in common: arrangements ............ . 53subheading: Investment incomeExceptions ............... . 17 Alimony deduction for taxes andof) Uncollected taxes ........... . 54More or less than insurance paid on home ownedNanny tax (See Domestic help) Withholding ............. . 38, 53expected ................. . 14 as ...................... . 132New motor vehicle taxes ... . 147, Employee contributingNet operating loss Dividends, reporting of ...... . 63149, 150 to ..................... . 54carryback ................ . 17 Terminal illness:Not deductible ............. . 149 Underwithholding ...... . 38, 54Offset: Accelerated payment of lifePersonal property taxes: Title insurance:Against debts .......... . 9, 14 insurance proceeds (SeeCar taxes ............... . 182 Property basis to include .... . 95Against next year's tax .... . 13, Accelerated death benefits)Deduction of ............ . 149 Title to property:42 Viatical settlements ......... . 87Real estate taxes (See Real Abstract fees, property basis toPast-due ................. . 9, 16 Termite damage:estate taxes) include ................... . 95Real estate taxes, treatment Not casualty losses ........ . 167Sales tax ................... . 95 Attorneys' fees:of ...................... . 148 Terrorist attacks:Withholding ................ . 36 Property basis to include .. . 95Reduced ................... . 18 Casualty loss due to ....... . 166Taxes, not support ........... . 34 Tolls:State and local income tax Disability payments for injuriesTax-exempt: Business-related travel ..... . 182refunds ................. . 146 from, tax exclusion ........ . 74Bonds and other Tools ....................... . 197State liability, effect on ...... . 18 Disability pensions for federalobligations ............... . 60 Hauling to and from work ... . 181Withholding .................. . 7 employees ............... . 52Income ................... . 201 Rental for use on rentalWorthless securities ......... . 17 Theft losses ... . 166-172, 197, 199Interest .................... . 60 property .................. . 68Claim for refund ......... . 100 $100 Rule ................. . 171Obligations: Tornadoes  (See also DisasterTax return preparation: Adjusted basis in property ... . 96,Adjusted basis ............ . 99 relief) ..................... . 169Rental expenses ............ . 68 97, 169Organizations: Casualty loss due to ....... . 166Tax returns  (See also Due dates; Amount of loss ............ . 168Related party Total support ................ . 32Joint Returns; Signatures) .... . 9, Appraisals ............. . 168, 169transactions ........... . 10213, 20 Tour guides:Cost of cleaning up or makingSection 457 deferred Free tour for organizingAliens ........................ . 6 repairs .................. . 168compensation plans .... . 74 tour ...................... . 92Amended (See also Form Costs of photographs andTax-exempt income .......... . 321040X) .......... . 16, 17, 139 Trade Act of 1974:appraisals ............... . 169Tax-exempt obligations:Attachments to returns ...... . 13 Trade readjustment allowancesDeduction of loss:Adjusted basis for ........... . 99 under .................... . 89Child ....................... . 13 When to take (TableTax-free exchanges:Copies of .................. . 16 Trade associations:25-2) ................. . 171Definition of ................ . 97Dating of ................... . 13 Meetings and entertainmentDefinition of theft ........... . 167Holding period, determinationFiling of (See also Filing expenses ............... . 179Fair market value of stolenof ...................... . 105requirements) .............. . 4 property ................. . 168 Trade of property  (See also Sale
Taxis:Forms to use ................. . 7 of property) ................. . 99Form 4684 to be filed ...... . 166
Business-related travelFree preparation help ......... . 9 Definition of ............... . 100Insurance proceeds, treatment
expense ................ . 174How to file ................. . 11 of ...................... . 169 Form 8824 for reporting .... . 101
Standard mileage rate notJoint returns (See Joint Returns) Net operating losses ....... . 172 Like property and money
allowed ................. . 182Mailing of ................ . 1, 15 transferred ........... . 98, 101Proof of loss ............... . 168
Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 269Paid preparer ............... . 13 Like-kind exchanges .... . 97, 101Property used partly for business
Taxpayer Assistance Center ... . 2Payment with ............... . 14 and partly for personal Nontaxable exchanges ...... . 97,
Phone number to be purposes ................ . 171Taxpayer identification number 101
included ................... . 2 (TIN): Recovered stolen Holding period, determination
Preparation fees ........... . 197 property ................. . 168Adoption (ATIN) ............ . 12 of .................... . 105
Private delivery services ....... . 9 Reimbursement ............ . 169Individual (ITIN) ............ . 12 Partially nontaxable
exchange ............ . 98, 101Request copy of, Form Social security number (See Reporting of gain or loss .... . 171,
4506 ..................... . 16 Social security number (SSN)) 172 Reporting of ............... . 101

Page 292 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
No main place of business or Qualified programs (See Qualified Unused sick leave:Trade of property  (Cont.)
work .................... . 173 tuition programs) Cash payments for ......... . 143Taxable exchange,
Nonaccountable plans, definitiondefined .................. . 97 Tuition programs, qualified  (See Use of home in business .... . 196
of ...................... . 187 Qualified tuition programs)Trade-in of car .............. . 182 Used clothing and household
Parking fees: Tuition, benefits under GI goods:Trading date of securities
Business-related travel ... . 182 Bill ........................ . 34 Charitable deduction for .... . 161transaction ............... . 104
Commuting expense ..... . 181 Used clothing and householdTraditional IRAs  (See Individual
Employer-provided fringe items:retirement arrangements (IRAs))
Ubenefit ................. . 48 Charitable deduction for fairTraffic violations:
Medical-related travel .... . 143 U.S. citizen: market value ............ . 162Fines not deductible ........ . 182
Earned income credit ...... . 235Probationary work Usurious interest ............ . 57Transfer taxes: periods ................. . 175 U.S. citizen or resident ....... . 26 Utilities:Property basis to include .... . 95 Proof of expenses ......... . 182 U.S. national ................. . 26 Charges for installing included inReal estate transactions Summary (Table 26-2) ... . 183 property basis ............ . 95U.S. obligations, interest ..... . 56,and ..................... . 149
Recordkeeping Emergency energy programs,57Transit passes ............... . 48 requirements ........ . 175, 182 charitable contributionsU.S. possessions:Transportation .............. . 215 Rental property maintenance and to ...................... . 158Charitable contributionsTransportation expenses  (See management, for ......... . 68 Energy conservationto ...................... . 158Travel and transportation subsidies ............. . 91, 94Reporting of ............... . 184 Deduction of income tax paidexpenses) Late payment charges, notTable 26-3 showing forms to be to ...................... . 146Transportation workers: deductible ............... . 156used .................. . 187 Income from .................. . 5Meal expenses ............ . 176 Rebates ................... . 94Resorts or cruise ships ..... . 176 U.S. Postal Service  (See PostDeduction limits ......... . 178 School children, transporting office employees)Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to of ....................... . 93 U.S. savings bonds:complete .............. . 188 VSummary of rules (Figure Education, used for ......... . 21Travel and transportation Vacation homes:26-B) ................... . 180 Interest on ................. . 93expenses .... . 173-177, 180-182 Determining if used asTax home, determination Transfer between spouses ... . 98Advances ............. . 185, 187 home .................... . 69of ...................... . 173 U.S. Treasury bills or notes:Allocation of types of Points .................... . 153Temporary assignment or Trade of .................. . 102costs ............... . 175, 183 Rental expenses ..... . 68, 69, 70job ..................... . 174 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, andBona fide business Valuations  (See also Appraisals;Temporary work location ... . 180 bonds ..................... . 60purpose ................. . 175 Fair market value (FMV)) .... . 95,Tips .................. . 174, 175 U.S. Virgin Islands:Business associates ....... . 175 168, 169Transit pass ................ . 48 Income from .................. . 5Business travel ............ . 174 Value of time or services:Work-related education ..... . 193, Unclaimed$75 or less .............. . 183 No charitable deduction194 reimbursement ........... . 193Confidential information for ............. . 158, 159, 161Traveling salespersons:and ................... . 183 Uncollected rent: Vandalism:Deduction of expenses ..... . 184 Income .................... . 67Employees' expenses .... . 175 Casualty loss due to ....... . 166Tax home, determinationIncidental expenses ...... . 175 Underpayment penalties ..... . 36, Vasectomy:of ...................... . 173Proof of business 42, 43 Deductibility as medicalTreasury bills, notes, andpurpose ............... . 183 IRS computation ............ . 44 expense ................ . 142bonds ..................... . 60Receipt not readily available to Undistributed capital Veterans benefits ............ . 50Treasury Inspector General:prove ................. . 183 gains ............. . 65, 113, 250 Retroactive determination ... . 52Telephone number to reportSpouse or dependents ... . 175 Unearned income of child  (See Special statute ofanonymously fraud orTrip outside U.S. ......... . 177 Children, subheading: Investment limitations. ............... . 52misconduct of IRSTrip primarily for income of) Veterans' benefits:employee .................. . 2business .............. . 176 Unemployment Educational assistance ...... . 93Treasury notes .............. . 56Trip primarily for personal compensation ........... . 7, 89 Veterans' insurance:reasons ............... . 176 Treaties: Credit card insurance Dividends on ............... . 66U.S. travel .............. . 176 Foreign charitable organizations, paying ................... . 91 Veterans' organizations:Unproved amounts ...... . 187 contributions to .......... . 158 Mandatory contributions to state Charitable contributionsVisiting clients or Trees and plants: funds, deduction of ...... . 146 to ...................... . 158customers ............ . 180 Cost of, when casualty or theft Private fund, from ........... . 90 30% limit ................ . 163Charitable organization service, loss involved ........ . 167, 168 Repayment of benefits ... . 89, 90 Viatical settlements .......... . 87deduction for ............ . 160 Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A,Trust beneficiaries: Victims of terrorism  (See TerroristCommuting expenses ...... . 181 or 1040EZ ............... . 89Dividends received by ....... . 63 attacks)Employer-provided commuter Supplemental benefits ....... . 89Losses of trust .............. . 92 VISTA volunteers ............ . 51vehicle ................. . 48 Voluntary benefit fundReceiving income from Vitamins:Conventions ............... . 177 contributions ............ . 201trust .................. . 91, 92 Not deductible as medicalDelegates, deduction of Withholding ............. . 39, 89Rollover restrictions ......... . 78 expense ................ . 142unreimbursed Unemployment tax:Trustees:amount ............... . 160 Volunteer firefighters:State employment taxes .... . 218Administrative fees ......... . 199Deductible expenses ....... . 175 Charitable contributionsUniform Settlement StatementIRA ....................... . 199Examples of (Table to ...................... . 158(Form HUD-1):IRAs:26-1) ................. . 174 IRAs ...................... . 123Points shown on ........... . 153Fees ................ . 121, 122Definition of ............... . 173 Volunteer work .......... . 50, 214Uniformed services ......... . 110Notification ofEstimates of ............... . 182 Deductibility of contributionsUniforms ................... . 197recharacterization ..... . 126Expenses paid for others ... . 201 (Table 24-2) ............. . 159Charitable organization requiring,Transfer from trustee toFederal crime investigators or Out-of-pocket expenses,deduction for cost and upkeeptrustee ............ . 125, 131prosecutors ............. . 174 deductible when serving forof ...................... . 160Trusts  (See also TrustForm 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill qualified organization .... . 157,Unions  (See also Laborbeneficiaries) .... . 63, 91, 92, 203out ..................... . 188 160unions) .......... . 39, 90, 93, 94Grantor trusts .............. . 92 Tax counseling (Volunteer IncomeFringe benefits ............. . 48 Assessments .............. . 197Income .................... . 91 Tax Assistance program) ... . 9,Getting from home to temporary Dues ..................... . 197Child beneficiary ......... . 209 51workplace when multiple regular United States  (See headingsInvestment interest ......... . 155 Value of income lost by, notworkplaces .............. . 180 starting with ªFederalº or ªU.S.º)Related party transactions with deductible ............... . 161Going home on days off from United Way  (See Charitablefiduciaries ............... . 102temporary assignment ... . 175 Vouchers for payment ofcontributions)TTY/TDD information ....... . 269Going to business meeting away tax ........................ . 42Universities  (See Colleges andTubal ligation:from regular workplace ... . 180 universities)Deductibility as medicalGoing to family home ...... . 174
Unlawful discrimination suits:expense ................ . 142 WIndefinite assignment ...... . 174 Deduction for costs ......... . 91Tuition: W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Job search expenses ....... . 93
Unmarried persons  (See SingleAlimony payments made toMedical purposes, for ...... . 142, Wages and salaries  (See also
taxpayers)cover ................... . 132143 Form W-2) ....... . 11, 45-53, 49
Unrecaptured Section 1250Charitable deduction not allowedMileage rates (See Standard Accident and health
gain .................. . 103, 114for paying ........... . 158, 161mileage rates) insurance ................ . 46
New employment .......... . 196 Credit (See Education credits) Unstated interest ........ . 95, 100 Accrued leave payment ..... . 46

Page 293 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Withholding (See Withholding) Highest rate, employer must Teachers .............. . 192, 193Wages and salaries  (Cont.)
withhold at if no W-4 ...... . 38 Temporary absence fromAdoption, employer Waiters and waitresses:
Incorrect form .............. . 43 work .................... . 191assistance ............... . 47 Tips (See Tip income)
IRA distributions ........... . 127 Travel expenses for ........ . 194Advance commissions ...... . 45 War veterans' organizations  (See
New job .................... . 37 UnclaimedAllowances and Veterans' organizations)
Penalties ............ . 36, 38, 40 reimbursement .......... . 193reimbursements ....... . 38, 45 War zone  (See Combat zone) Pensions and annuities ...... . 13,Archer MSA contributions .... . 47 Worksheets:Wash sales ........ . 100, 102, 105 39, 75, 77Awards and prizes .......... . 45 Capital loss carryover ...... . 114Washington State Supplemental Railroad retirementBabysitting ................. . 45 Casualty and theft losses ... . 166Workmen's Compensation benefits ............... . 39, 82Back pay awards ........... . 45 Excess withholding credit ... . 252Fund ..................... . 146 Repaying withheld tax ....... . 38Bonuses ................... . 45 Head of household status andWelfare benefits .......... . 32, 90 Rollovers ................... . 77Child care providers ......... . 45 cost of keeping up home .. . 23What's new .................... . 1 Salaries and wages ......... . 36Children's earnings ........... . 6 Individual retirementMedical and dental expenses: Separate returns ............ . 43Clergy ..................... . 49 arrangements (IRAs), modifiedStandard mileage ........... . 1 Sick pay ................... . 38De minimis benefits ......... . 47 AGI computation (WorksheetMoving expenses: Social security benefits ... . 39, 82Elective deferrals ........... . 49 17-1) ................... . 123Standard mileage ........... . 1 State and local income taxes,Employee achievement Pensions or annuities, jointStandard mileage rates ........ . 1 deduction for ............ . 146award ................... . 45 returns ................... . 78
Wheelchairs: Supplemental wages ........ . 38Employee compensation .... . 45 Roth IRA modified adjusted gross
As medical expense ........ . 142 Tips (See Tip income)Farmworkers ............... . 36 income (MAGI), computation
Widow/widower  (See Surviving UnemploymentForeign employer ........... . 50 (Worksheet 17-2) ........ . 129
spouse) compensation ......... . 39, 89Form W-2 (See Form W-2) Simplified Method computation of
Fringe benefits ............. . 46 Winter energy payments ..... . 91 Work clothes ............... . 197 taxable annuity ........... . 76
Garnisheed ................ . 11 Social security or railroadWithholding  (See also Form Workers' compensation ...... . 52
Government cost-of-living retirement benefits, to figureW-2) ............. . 11, 36-43, 37 Mandatory contributions to state
allowances ............... . 46 taxability .............. . 81, 82Agricultural Act of 1949 funds, deduction of ...... . 146
Household workers ......... . 36 Student loan interestpayments ................ . 39 Return to work .............. . 52
Income ...................... . 7 deduction ............... . 136Changing amount withheld .. . 37 Work-related education ..... . 191
Foreign .................. . 45 Support test ................ . 32For 2011 ................. . 37 Business deduction:
Long-term care coverage .... . 46 Withholding (Form W-4) ..... . 37Checking amount of ..... . 37, 226 Qualified
Military retirees .......... . 36, 50 Claim for refund .............. . 7 World Trade Center attacks  (Seeexpenses ......... . 193-194
Military service ............. . 50 Commodity credit loans ..... . 39 Terrorist attacks)Reimbursements ........ . 194
Miscellaneous Credit for ................ . 36, 42 Tax benefit of ........... . 191 Worthless securities ........ . 100
compensation ............ . 45 Cumulative wage method .... . 37 Education required by employer or Wristwatch ................. . 201Note for services ............ . 46 Definition ................... . 36 by law .................. . 191 Write-offs  (See Cancellation ofOutplacement services ...... . 46 Determining amount to Education that qualifies for new debt)Religious orders ............ . 50 withhold ............... . 36, 37 trade or business ........ . 193
Restricted property .......... . 49 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 Education to maintain or improve
Dividends on restricted payments ................ . 39 Yskills .................... . 191
stock .................. . 49 Dividend income ............ . 63 Education to meet minimum Yard-care workers  (See DomesticRetirement plan contributions by Employers, rules for ......... . 37 requirements ............ . 192 help)employer ................. . 49 Exemption from ............. . 38 Indefinite absence from Youth groups:Severance pay ............. . 46 Federal income taxes, not work .................... . 191 Troop leader's travelSick pay ................ . 46, 52 deductible ............... . 150 Meal expenses ............ . 194 expenses ............... . 160Social security and Medicare Fiscal years ................ . 43 Qualifying education (Figure
taxes paid by employer .... . 46 Form W-4: 27-A) ................... . 192 ■
Stock appreciation rights .... . 46 Provided by employer ..... . 38 Recordkeeping
Stock options ............... . 49 Fringe benefits ............. . 38 requirements ............ . 195
Supplemental .............. . 38 Gambling winnings ....... . 39, 43 Reimbursement for ........ . 194
Volunteer work ............. . 50 General rules ............... . 36

Page 294 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2011
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2011
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los
Ingresos Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850(EN/SP)
17(SP)
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544(SP)
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity, and
Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547(SP)
Registro de Pérdidas por Hechos
Fortuitos (Imprevistos), Desastres
y Robos (Propiedad de Uso
Personal)
584(SP)
Poder Legal y Declaración del Representante
2848(SP)
Solicitud de Prórroga Automática para
Presentar la Declaración del Impuesto
sobre el Ingreso Personal de los Estados
Unidos
4868(SP)
Solicitud para un Plan de Pagos a Plazos9465(SP)

Page 295 of 295 of Publication 17 13:14 - 17-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions 1040 -- 24811v17
Order Form
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order form below.
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instructions, and one copy of
each publication you order. To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need
to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs.
How To Use the Order
Form
Circle the items you need on the order form
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address
accurately in the space provided below to
ensure delivery of your order. Enclose the
order form in an envelope and mail it to the
IRS address shown on this page. You should
receive your order within 10 days after
receipt of your request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed below. Instead, see Where To File.
TIP
Mail Your Order Form To:
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
N
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Order Form
Please Print
Use the blank spaces to
order items not listed.
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
/H17073/H17073
Save Money and Time by Going Online!
Download or order these and other tax products at www.irs.gov/formspubs
Schedule R
(1040A or
1040)
2441
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Schedule A
(1040)
1040-ES
(2010)
Pub. 1
1040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 526
Schedule D
(1040)
2106
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
6251
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505Schedule EIC
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502 Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 915
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 972
4506 Pub. 535
4684
Pub. 525
Pub. 5474506-T
Pub. 587
Pub. 551
Pub. 583
Pub. 919
Pub. 9468917
5405
Pub. 4681
Schedule B
(1040A or
1040)
Schedule L
(1040A or
1040)
Schedule M
(1040A or
1040)