Userid: SD_T81KB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...ubs and Instruct\2009 Cycle Year\P 525\09P525 - 01-25-10 - EPIC.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047D
What's New for 2009 .............. . 1Department
of the What's New for 2010 .............. . 2Treasury Taxable and 
Reminders ..................... . 2Internal
Revenue Introduction .................... . 2Nontaxable Service
Employee Compensation .......... . 3
Miscellaneous Compensation ....... . 3
Income Fringe Benefits ................ . 4
Retirement Plan Contributions ...... . 9
Stock Options ................ . 11
Restricted Property ............. . 13For use in preparing
Special Rules for Certain
Employees .................. . 142009 Returns
Clergy ..................... . 14
Members of Religious Orders ...... . 14
Foreign Employer .............. . 14
Military ..................... . 15
Volunteers .................. . 15
Business and Investment Income .... . 15
Rents From Personal Property ..... . 16
Royalties ................... . 16
Partnership Income ............ . 16
S Corporation Income ........... . 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ........ . 17
Disability Pensions ............. . 17
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ................ . 17
Workers' Compensation ......... . 18
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits ................. . 18
Miscellaneous Income ............ . 19
Bartering ................... . 19
Canceled Debts ............... . 19
Host or Hostess ............... . 21
Life Insurance Proceeds ......... . 21
Recoveries .................. . 22
Survivor Benefits .............. . 29
Unemployment Benefits ......... . 29
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits ......... . 30
Other Income ................ . 31
Repayments ................... . 36
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 37
Index ......................... . 39
What's New for 2009
Economic recovery payment. Any economic
recovery payment you received is not taxable for
federal income tax purposes. See the discus-
sion under Other Income.
Differential wage payments. PaymentsGet forms and other information
made by an employer to an individual for anyfaster and easier by: period during which the individual is an active
duty member of the uniformed services are
Internet www.irs.gov treated as wages. See the discussion under
Miscellaneous Compensation.
Jan 26, 2010

Page 2 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bicycle commuters. The qualified employer • The exclusion of qualified charitable distri- Qualified joint venture. A qualified joint ven-
butions. ture conducted by you and your spouse may nottransportation fringe benefit is expanded to in-
be treated as a partnership if you file a jointclude any qualified bicycle commuting reim-
return for the tax year. See Partnership Income.bursement. See Transportation under Fringe
Benefits. Photographs of missing children. The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theTransportation fringe benefits increased. Reminders
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-Beginning January 1, 2009, the exclusion for
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedcommuter vehicle transportation and transit Terrorist attacks. You can exclude from in- by the Center may appear in this publication onpass fringe benefits cannot be more than a total come certain disaster assistance, disability, and pages that otherwise would be blank. You canof $120 per month. Beginning March 1, 2009, death payments received as a result of a terror- help bring these children home by looking at thethe amount of the exclusion increased to $230 a ist or military action. For more information, see photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTmonth. See Transportation under Fringe Bene- Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.fits. rorist Attacks.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans Astronauts. You also can exclude death pay-
of nonqualified entities. Generally, for serv- ments for astronauts dying in the line of duty
Introductionices performed after 2008, any compensation after 2002.
deferred under a nonqualified deferred compen- You can receive income in the form of money,Qualified settlement income. If you are asation plan of a nonqualified entity is included in property, or services. This publication discussesqualified taxpayer, you can contribute all or partgross income when there is no substantial risk of many kinds of income and explains whetherof your qualified settlement income, up toforfeiture of the rights to such compensation. For they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-$100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, includ-this purpose, a nonqualified entity is: cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-ing an IRA. Contributions to eligible retirement fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, Splans other than a Roth IRA or a designated1. A foreign corporation unless substantially corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-Roth contribution, reduce the qualified settle-all of its income is: mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-ment income that you must include in income. ceeds, and welfare and other public assistancea. Effectively connected with the conduct See Exxon Valdez settlement income  under benefits. Check the index for the location of aof a trade or business in the United Other Income. specific subject.States, or
Generally, an amount included in your in-Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or
b. Subject to a comprehensive foreign in- come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-resident alien, you must report income from
come tax. empted by law. Income that is taxable must besources outside the United States (foreign in-
reported on your return and is subject to tax.come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by
2. A partnership unless substantially all of its Income that is nontaxable may have to beU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside
income is allocated to persons other than: shown on your tax return but is not taxable.or outside the United States and whether or not
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-a. Foreign persons for whom the income ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This Constructively received income. You areis not subject to a comprehensive for- applies to earned income (such as wages and generally taxed on income that is available toeign income tax, and tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- you, regardless of whether it is actually in your
est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, possession.b. Tax-exempt organizations.
and royalties). A valid check that you received or that was
made available to you before the end of the tax If you reside outside the United States, youCash for clunkers. If you received a voucher year is considered income constructively re-may be able to exclude part or all of your foreignto be applied toward the purchase of a qualified ceived in that year, even if you do not cash thesource earned income. For details, see Publica-new vehicle in exchange for the trade in of an check or deposit it to your account until the nexttion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-eligible used vehicle, the amount of the voucher year. For example, if the postal service tries todent Aliens Abroad.is not taxable for federal income tax purposes. deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax
See the discussion under Other Income. year but you are not at home to receive it, youDisaster mitigation payments. You can ex-
must include the amount in your income for thatclude from income grants you use to mitigateUnemployment compensation. For 2009, tax year. If the check was mailed so that it could(reduce the severity of) potential damage fromyou do not have to pay tax on the first $2,400 of not possibly reach you until after the end of thefuture natural disasters that are paid to youunemployment compensation per recipient. See tax year, and you otherwise could not get thethrough state and local governments. For moreUnemployment Benefits. funds before the end of the year, you include theinformation, see Disaster mitigation payments
amount in your income for the next tax year.under Welfare and Other Public AssistanceHome Affordable Modification Program Benefits.(HAMP). If you benefit from Assignment of income. Income received
by an agent for you is income you constructivelyPay-for-Performance Success Payments under Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.
received in the year the agent received it. If youHAMP, the payments are not taxable. Generally, all amounts deferred under a non-
agree by contract that a third party is to receivequalified deferred compensation plan for all tax
income for you, you must include the amount inyears are included in gross income for the cur-
your income when the third party receives it.rent year, unless certain requirements are met.
See Nonqualified deferred compensation plansWhat's New for 2010 Example. You and your employer agreeunder Employee Compensation. that part of your salary is to be paid directly toRoth IRAs. Half of any income that results your former spouse. You must include thatHealth Savings Account (HSA). You canfrom a rollover or conversion to a Roth IRA from amount in your income when your formerfund your HSA with a one-time direct transferanother retirement plan in 2010 is included in spouse receives it.from your individual retirement plan, health reim-income in 2011, and the other half in 2012, bursement account, or health flexible spendingunless you elect to include all of it in 2010. account and exclude the amount of the transfer Prepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
from income. However, you must include the compensation for future services, generally isExclusions from income. The following ex- amount transferred in your income, as well as included in your income in the year you receiveclusions from income are scheduled to expire pay a 10% additional tax, if you do not remain an it. However, if you use an accrual method ofand will not be available in 2010: eligible individual for at least 12 months after the accounting, you can defer prepaid income you
• The exclusion of up to $2,400 of unem- month of the transfer. See Accident or Health receive for services to be performed before the
ployment compensation. Plan under Fringe Benefits. end of the next tax year. In this case, you include
Page 2 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 3 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the payment in your income as you earn it by See How To Get Tax Help, near the end of 2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
performing the services. this publication, for information about getting 2006-40_IRB/ar12.html.
these publications.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome Miscellaneousyour comments about this publication and your
Compensationsuggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address: Employee This section discusses many types of employee
compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-
CompensationInternal Revenue Service phabetical order.
Individual Forms and Publications Branch
Generally, you must include in gross incomeSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I Advance commissions and other earnings.
everything you receive in payment for personal1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 If you receive advance commissions or otherservices. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-Washington, DC 20224 amounts for services to be performed in thesions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms of future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, youcompensation such as fringe benefits and stockWe respond to many letters by telephone. must include these amounts in your income inoptions.Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in- the year you receive them.
   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage andclude your daytime phone number, including the If you repay unearned commissions or otherTax Statement, from your employer showing thearea code, in your correspondence. amounts in the same year you receive them,pay you received for your services. Include yourYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The reduce the amount included in your income bypay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or onasterisk must be included in the address.) the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxline 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub- year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-ceive a Form W-2.ject line. Although we cannot respond individu- ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),If you performed services, other than as anally to each email, we do appreciate your or you may be able to take a credit for that year.independent contractor, and your employer didfeedback and will consider your comments as See Repayments, later.not withhold social security and Medicare taxeswe revise our tax products.
from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- Allowances and reimbursements.   If youOrdering forms and publications. Visit lected Social Security and Medicare Tax on receive travel, transportation, or other businesswww.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and Wages, with your Form 1040. These wagespublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the expense allowances or reimbursements frommust be included on line 7 of Form 1040. Seeaddress below and receive a response within 10 your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En-Form 8919 for more information.days after your request is received. tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are
reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-Childcare providers. If you provide childcare,
tion 521, Moving Expenses.either in the child's home or in your home orInternal Revenue Service
other place of business, the pay you receive1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Back pay awards. Include in income amountsmust be included in your income. If you are notBloomington, IL 61705-6613
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment foran employee, you are probably self-employed
back pay. These include payments made to youand must include payments for your services onTax questions. If you have a tax question, for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromcheck the information available on www.irs.gov and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Netor call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax should be reported to you by your employer onProfit From Business. You generally are not anquestions sent to either of the above addresses. Form W-2.employee unless you are subject to the will and
control of the person who employs you as to
Useful Items what you are to do and how you are to do it. Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsYou may want to see: you receive for outstanding work are included inBabysitting. If you babysit for relatives or your income and should be shown on your Formneighborhood children, whether on a regularPublication W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsbasis or only periodically, the rules for childcare for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For providers apply to you.
receive is goods or services, you must includeIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or
the fair market value of the goods or services inC-EZ) Bankruptcy. If you filed for bankruptcy under
your income. However, if your employer merelyChapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you must❏ 523 Selling Your Home promises to pay you a bonus or award at someallocate your wages and withheld income tax.
❏ 527 Residential Rental Property future time, it is not taxable until you receive it orYour W-2 will show your total wages and with-
(Including Rental of Vacation it is made available to you.held income tax for the year. On your tax return,
Homes) you report the wages and withheld income tax Employee achievement award. If you re-for the period before you filed for bankruptcy.❏ 541 Partnerships ceive tangible personal property (other thanYour bankruptcy estate reports the wages and cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of withheld income tax for the period after you filed an award for length of service or safety achieve-Assets for bankruptcy. If you receive other information ment, you generally can exclude its value fromreturns (such as Form 1099-DIV or 1099-INT)❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses your income. However, the amount you can ex-that report gross income to you, rather than to(Including Capital Gains and clude is limited to your employer's cost andthe bankruptcy estate, you must allocate thatLosses) cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsincome. that are not qualified plan awards) for all such❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and The only exception is for purposes of figuring awards you receive during the year. Your em-Administrators your self-employment tax, if you are ployer can tell you whether your award is aself-employed. For that purpose, you must take❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions qualified plan award. Your employer must makeinto account all your self-employment income for the award as part of a meaningful presentation,❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income the year from services performed both before under conditions and circumstances that do notand after the beginning of the case.❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
You must file a statement with your incomeRailroad Retirement Benefits guised pay.
tax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11 However, the exclusion does not apply to the❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education bankruptcy case. The statement must show the following awards.❏ 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, allocation and describe the method used to
• A length-of-service award if you received itRepossessions, and make the allocation. For a sample of this state-
for less than 5 years of service or if youAbandonments ment and other information, see Notice 2006-83,
Publication 525 (2009) Page 3

Page 4 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
received another length-of-service award the fair market value that you previously in- wages if you are a household worker or a farm
during the year or the previous 4 years. cluded in your income. Do not include that part worker.
again in your income. Include the rest of the• A safety achievement award if you are a Stock appreciation rights. Do not include apayment in your income in the year of payment.manager, administrator, clerical employee, stock appreciation right granted by your em-If your employer gives you a nonnegotiableor other professional employee or if more ployer in income until you exercise (use) theunsecured note as payment for your services,than 10% of eligible employees previously right. When you use the right, you are entitled topayments on the note that are credited towardreceived safety achievement awards dur- a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofthe principal amount of the note are compensa-ing the year. the corporation's stock on the date of use minustion income when you receive them. the fair market value on the date the right was
granted. You include the cash payment in in-Severance pay. You must include in incomeExample. Ben Green received three em- come in the year you use the right.amounts you receive as severance pay and anyployee achievement awards during the year: a
payment for the cancellation of your employ-nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at
Fringe Benefitsment contract.$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed- Fringe benefits received in connection with the$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali- eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment performance of your services are included infied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each for accrued annual leave when you retire or your income as compensation unless you payaward by itself would be excluded from income. resign, this amount will be included as wages on fair market value for them or they are specificallyHowever, because the $1,750 total value of the your Form W-2. excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include If you resign from one agency and are reem- ance of services (for example, under a covenant$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income. ployed by another agency, you may have to not to compete) is treated as the performance of
repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-Differential wage payments. This is any pay- services for purposes of these rules.
ment to the second agency. You can reducement made by an employer to an individual for See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this
gross wages by the amount you repaid in theany period during which the individual is, for a discussion, for information on how to determine
same tax year in which you received it. Attach toperiod of more than 30 days, an active duty the amount to include in income.
your tax return a copy of the receipt or statementmember of the uniformed services and repre- Recipient of fringe benefit. You are the re-given to you by the agency you repaid to explainsents all or a portion of the wages the individual cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform thethe difference between the wages on your returnwould have received from the employer for that services for which the fringe benefit is provided.and the wages on your Forms W-2.period. These payments are treated as wages You are considered to be the recipient even if itand are subject to income tax withholding, but Outplacement services. If you choose to is given to another person, such as a member ofnot FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments are accept a reduced amount of severance pay so your family. An example is a car your employerreported as wages on Form W-2. that you can receive outplacement services gives to your spouse for services you perform.
(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interviewGovernment cost-of-living allowances. The car is considered to have been provided to
techniques), you must include the unreducedCost-of-living allowances generally are included you and not to your spouse.
amount of the severance pay in income.in your income. However, they are not included You do not have to be an employee of the
However, you can deduct the value of thesein your income if you are a federal civilian em- provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If
outplacement services (up to the difference be-ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- you are a partner, director, or independent con-
tween the severance pay included in incometioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United tractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringe
and the amount actually received) as a miscella-States. Beginning January 1, 2010, these fed- benefit.
neous deduction (subject to theeral employees will be transitioned from a non- Provider of benefit. Your employer or an-2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) ontaxable cost-of-living adjustment to a taxable other person for whom you perform services isSchedule A (Form 1040).locality-based comparability payment. the provider of a fringe benefit regardless ofAllowances and differentials that increase whether that person actually provides the fringeSick pay. Pay you receive from your employeryour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less benefit to you. The provider can be a client orwhile you are sick or injured is part of your salarydesirable post of duty are part of your compen- customer of an independent contractor.or wages. In addition, you must include in yoursation and must be included in income. For
income sick pay benefits received from any ofexample, your compensation includes Foreign Accounting period. You must use the samethe following payers.Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical accounting period your employer uses to report
differentials. For more information, see Publica- your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-• A welfare fund.
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees ployer has the option to report taxable noncash• A state sickness or disability fund.Stationed Abroad. fringe benefits by using either of the following
rules.• An association of employers or employ-Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. ees.Your employer will report to you the total amount • The general rule: benefits are reported for
of deferrals for the year under a nonqualified a full calendar year (January 1±December• An insurance company, if your employer
deferred compensation plan. This amount is 31).paid for the plan.
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This • The special accounting period rule: bene-However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-amount is not included in your income. fits provided during the last 2 months ofdent or health insurance policy, the benefits youHowever, if at any time during the tax year, the calendar year (or any shorter period)receive under the policy are not taxable. Forthe plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is are treated as paid during the followingmore information, see Other Sickness and Injurynot operated under those requirements, all calendar year. For example, each yearBenefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year your employer reports the value of bene-later.and all preceding tax years are included in your fits provided during the last 2 months ofincome for the current year. This amount is in- Social security and Medicare taxes paid by the prior year and the first 10 months ofcluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box employer. If you and your employer have an the current year.1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using agreement that your employer pays your socialcode Z. Your employer does not have to use the samesecurity and Medicare taxes without deducting accounting period for each fringe benefit, butNote received for services. If your employer them from your gross wages, you must report must use the same period for all employees whogives you a secured note as payment for your the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages receive a particular benefit.services, you must include the fair market value on your tax return. The payment is also treated
(usually the discount value) of the note in your as wages for figuring your social security and You must use the same accounting period
income for the year you receive it. When you Medicare taxes and your social security and that you use to report the benefit to claim an
later receive payments on the note, a propor- Medicare benefits. However, these payments employee business deduction (for use of a car,
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of are not treated as social security and Medicare for example).
Page 4 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 5 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax- employer are not included in your income. Distri- If your employer pays for a fitness program
able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other butions from your HSA that are used to pay provided to you at an off-site resort hotel or
compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of qualified medical expenses are not included in athletic club, the value of the program is in-
your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14. your income. Distributions not used for qualified cluded in your compensation.
The value of your fringe benefits may be added medical expenses are included in your income.
to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or See Publication 969 for the requirements of an
De Minimis (Minimal) Benefitsyou may receive a separate Form W-2 showing HSA.
just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 with Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide If your employer provides you with a product ora notation in box 14. partner's HSA are not contributions by an em- service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- be unreasonable for the employer to account forbution of money and are not included in the it, the value is not included in your income.Accident or Health Plan partner's gross income. Contributions by a part- Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-nership to a partner's HSA for services renderedGenerally, the value of accident or health plan counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeare treated as guaranteed payments that arecoverage provided to you by your employer is when working overtime, and company picnicsincludible in the partner's gross income. In bothnot included in your income. Benefits you re- are not included in your income. Also see Em-situations, the partner can deduct the contribu-ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex- ployee Discounts, later.tion made to the partner's HSA.plained, later, under Sickness and Injury Contributions by an S corporation to a 2%Benefits. Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you ashareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-For information on the items covered in this turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atdered are treated as guaranteed payments andsection, other than Long-term care coverage, Christmas or other holidays, do not include theare includible in the shareholder-employee'ssee Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts value of the gift in your income. However, if yourgross income. The shareholder-employee canand Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or adeduct the contribution made to the share- similar item that you easily can exchange forLong-term care coverage. Contributions by holder-employee's HSA. cash, you include the value of that gift as extrayour employer to provide coverage for long-term
Qualified HSA funding distribution. You salary or wages regardless of the amount in-care services generally are not included in your
can make a one-time distribution from your indi- volved.income. However, contributions made through a
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA andflexible spending or similar arrangement (such
you generally will not include any of the distribu-as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your
Dependent Care Benefitstion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi-income. This amount will be reported as wages
vidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for thein box 1 of your Form W-2. If your employer provides dependent care bene-requirements for these qualified HSA funding
Archer MSA contributions. Contributions by fits under a qualified plan, you may be able todistributions.
your employer to your Archer MSA generally are exclude these benefits from your income. De-
Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAnot included in your income. Their total will be pendent care benefits include:
received qualified HSA distributions from areported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R. • Amounts your employer pays directly tohealth FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-You must report this amount on Form 8853, either you or your care provider for theified HSA funding distribution, you must be anArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance care of your qualifying person while youeligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-Contracts. File the form with your return. work, andriod beginning with the month in which the quali-Health flexible spending arrangement fied distribution was made and ending on the • The fair market value of care in a daycare(health FSA). If your employer provides a last day of the 12th month following that month. facility provided or sponsored by your em-health FSA that qualifies as an accident or If you fail to be an eligible individual during this ployer.health plan, the amount of your salary reduction, period, other than because of death or disability,and reimbursements of your medical care ex- you must include the distribution in your income The amount you can exclude is limited to thepenses and those of your spouse and depen- for the tax year in which you become ineligible. lesser of:dents, generally are not included in your income. This income is also subject to an additional 10%
• The total amount of dependent care bene-tax.Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA fits you received during the year,can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis-
tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee • The total amount of qualified expenses
Adoption Assistanceby your employer. Generally, the distribution is you incurred during the year,
not included in your income and is not deducti- • Your earned income,You may be able to exclude from your incomeble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-these qualified HSA distributions. • Your spouse's earned income, orployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-nection with your adoption of an eligible child.
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies rately).See Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
as an accident or health plan, coverage and tion Expenses, for more information.
reimbursements of your medical care expenses Your employer must show the total amount ofAdoption benefits are reported by your em-
and those of your spouse and dependents gen- dependent care benefits provided to you duringployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They
erally are not included in your income. the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of youralso are included as social security and Medi-
Form W-2. Your employer also will include anycare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can dependent care benefits over $5,000 in yournot included as wages in box 1. To determinemake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you musttion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by
complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form with  To claim the exclusion, you must completeyour employer. Generally, the distribution is not
your return. Part III of Form 2441, Child and Dependent Careincluded in your income and is not deductible.
Expenses. See the instructions for Form 2441See Publication 969 for the requirements for
for more information.these qualified HSA distributions.
Athletic Facilities
Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are
If your employer provides you with the free oran eligible individual, you and any other person, Educational Assistance
low-cost use of an employer-operated gym orincluding your employer or a family member,
other athletic club on your employer's premises, You can exclude from your income up to $5,250can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-
the value is not included in your compensation. of qualified employer-provided educational as-tions, other than employer contributions, are de-
The gym must be used primarily by employees, sistance. For more information, see Publicationductible on your return whether or not you
their spouses, and their dependent children. 970.itemize deductions. Contributions made by your
Publication 525 (2009) Page 5

Page 6 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay for them. Your employer should be able toEmployee Discounts Worksheet 1. Figuring the
tell you the amount to include in your income. Cost of Group-Term Life
If your employer sells you property or services at Insurance To Include inAccidental death benefits. Insurance thata discount, you may be able to exclude the Incomeprovides accidental or other death benefits butamount of the discount from your income. The Keep for Your Records
does not provide general death benefits (travelexclusion applies to discounts on property or
insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeservices offered to customers in the ordinary
insurance. 1. Enter the total amount ofcourse of the line of business in which you work.
your insurance coverageHowever, it does not apply to discounts on real Former employer. If your former employer from your employer(s) ... . 1.property or property commonly held for invest- provided more than $50,000 of group-term life
ment (such as stocks or bonds). insurance coverage during the year, the amount 2. Limit on exclusion forincluded in your income is reported as wages inThe exclusion is limited to the price charged employer-providedbox 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelynonemployee customers multiplied by the fol- group-term life insurancein box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show thelowing percentage. coverage ............ . 2. 50,000amount of uncollected social security and Medi-• For a discount on property, your em- care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3.ployer's gross profit percentage (gross M and N. You must pay these taxes with yourprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop- income tax return. Include them in your total tax 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.erty sold during the employer's previous on line 60, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the Figure to the nearest tenth 4.tax year. (Ask your employer for this per- amount of the taxes on the dotted line next tocentage.) line 60. 5. Go to Table 1. Using your
• For a discount on services, 20%. age on the last day of theTwo or more employers. Your exclusion for
tax year, find your ageemployer-provided group-term life insurance
group in the left column,coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 ofFinancial Counseling Fees and enter the cost from thecoverage, whether the insurance is provided by column on the right for yourFinancial counseling fees paid for you by your a single employer or multiple employers. If two age group ........... . 5.employer are included in your income and must or more employers provide insurance coverage
be reported as part of wages. If the fees are for that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .. . 6.tax or investment counseling, they can be de- ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel- correct. You must figure how much to include in 7. Enter the number of fulllaneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-AGI your income. Reduce the amount you figure by months of coverage at thislimit). any amount reported with code C in box 12 of cost ............... . 7.your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages   Qualified retirement planning services paid
reported in box 1, and report the total on yourfor you by your employer may be excluded from 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .. . 8.return.your income. For more information, see Retire-
ment Planning Services, later. 9. Enter theFiguring the taxable cost.  Use the following
premiums youworksheet to figure the amount to include in your
paid per month 9.income.Group-Term Life Insurance If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-
10. Enter the numberance, your entire payment reduces, dollar forGenerally, the cost of up to $50,000 of of months youdollar, the amount you otherwise would includegroup-term life insurance coverage provided to paid thein your income. However, you cannot reduce theyou by your employer (or former employer) is not premiums ... . 10.amount to include in your income by:included in your income. However, you must
include in income the cost of employer-provided • Payments for coverage in a different tax 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . 11.
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 year,
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.• Payments for coverage through a cafeteriatoward the purchase of the insurance. Include this amount inplan, unless the payments are after-tax your income as wages .. . 12.For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost contributions, or
excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.
• Payments for coverage not taxed to youIf your employer provided more than $50,000 because of the exceptions discussed laterof coverage, the amount included in your in- under Entire cost excluded. Table 1. Cost of $1,000 ofcome is reported as part of your wages in box 1 Group-Term Life Insurance for Oneof your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately in Monthbox 12 with code C.
Age CostGroup-term life insurance. This insurance is Under 25 ............ . $ .05term life insurance protection (insurance for a 25 through 29 ........ .  .06fixed period of time) that:
30 through 34 ........ . .08• Provides a general death benefit,
35 through 39 ........ . .09• Is provided to a group of employees,
40 through 44 ........ . .10• Is provided under a policy carried by the
45 through 49 ........ . .15employer, and
• Provides an amount of insurance to each 50 through 54 ........ . .23employee based on a formula that pre- 55 through 59 ........ . .43vents individual selection.
60 through 64 ........ . .66Permanent benefits. If your group-term life 65 through 69 ........ . 1.27insurance policy includes permanent benefits,
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you 70 and older ......... . 2.06must include in your income, as wages, the cost
of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
Page 6 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 7 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are 51 years old and work for a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and Academic health center. This is an organi-
were covered by the plan when you re-employers A and B. Both employers provide zation that meets the following conditions.
tired, orgroup-term life insurance coverage for you for • Its principal purpose or function is to pro-the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with b. You reached age 55 before January 2, vide medical or hospital care or medicalemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 1984, and were employed by the em- education or research.pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- ployer or its predecessor in 1983.ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to • It receives payments for graduate medical
include in your income as follows. education under the Social Security Act.
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire • One of its principal purposes or functionscost of group-term life insurance if either of the
is to provide and teach basic and clinicalWorksheet 1. Figuring the following circumstances apply.
medical science and research using itsCost of Group-Term Life • The insurance is provided by your em- own faculty.Insurance To Include in ployer through a qualified employees'IncomeÐIllustrated trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam-Keep for Your Records
 annuity plan. pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your
spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on• You are a key employee and your em-1. Enter the total amount of your behalf of, the institution or center for use as aployer's plan discriminates in favor of keyinsurance coverage from your employees. home. The lodging must be located on or near aemployer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000 campus of the educational institution or aca-2. Limit on exclusion for
demic health center.employer-provided Meals and Lodging
group-term life insurance Adequate rent. The amount of rent you paycoverage ............ . 2. 50,000 You do not include in your income the value of for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-meals and lodging provided to you and your3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000 sidered adequate if it is at least equal to thefamily by your employer at no charge if the4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. lesser of:Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0 following conditions are met.
• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,5. Go to Table 1. Using your
1. The meals are:age on the last day of the tax or
year, find your age group in a. Furnished on the business premises of • The average of rentals paid by individualsthe left column, and enter the your employer, and (other than employees or students) forcost from the column on the
comparable lodging held for rent by theright for your age group .. . 5. .23 b. Furnished for the convenience of your
educational institution.6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90 employer.
7. Enter the number of full If the amount you pay is less than the lesser ofmonths of coverage at this 2. The lodging is: these amounts, you must include the differencecost. ............... . 7. 12 in your income.a. Furnished on the business premises of8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80
your employer, The lodging must be appraised by an inde-9. Enter the premiums
you paid per month 9. 4.15 pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beb. Furnished for the convenience of your10. Enter the number of reviewed on an annual basis.employer, andmonths you paid
the premiums ... . 10. 12 c. A condition of your employment. (You Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80 must accept it in order to be able to sor for State University, rents a home from the
properly perform your duties.)12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. university that is qualified campus lodging. The
Include this amount in your house is appraised at $200,000. The averageincome as wages ...... . 12. 33.00  You also do not include in your income the rent paid for comparable university lodging byvalue of meals or meal money that qualifies as a persons other than employees or students isde minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-The total amount to include in income for the $14,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent ofmal) Benefits, earlier.cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33. $11,000. Carl does not include in his income any
Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur- Lodging for employees affected by Midwest- rental value because the rent he pays equals at
ance coverage, so the wages shown on your ern disaster. If your employer provides least 5% of the appraised value of the house
Forms W-2 do not include any part of that $33. in-kind lodging to you (or your spouse or depen- (5% ×  $200,000 = $10,000). If Carl paid annual
You must add it to the wages shown on your dents), you may be able to exclude from income rent of only $8,000, he would have to include
Forms W-2 and include the total on your return. part or all of the value of this lodging. The exclu- $2,000 in his income ($10,000 − $8,000).
sion is equal to the value of lodging furnished
from November 2008 through April 2009, up to aEntire cost excluded. You are not taxed on
maximum of $600 per month.the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the Moving Expense Reimbursements
You can exclude the value only if you hadfollowing circumstances apply.
Generally, if your employer pays for your movingyour main home in a Midwestern disaster area
1. You are permanently and totally disabled on the applicable disaster date and you perform expenses (either directly or indirectly) and the
and have ended your employment. substantially all your work in a Midwestern dis- expenses would have been deductible if you
aster area for the employer furnishing the lodg- paid them yourself, the value is not included in2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- ing. You cannot be a dependent of, or related to, your income. See Publication 521, for more in-icy for the entire period the insurance is in your employer. For more information, see Publi- formation.force during the tax year. cation 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay-
3. A charitable organization to which contri- ers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas.
butions are deductible is the only benefi- No-Additional-Cost ServicesFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of anciary of the policy for the entire period the educational institution or an academic health The value of services you receive from yourinsurance is in force during the tax year. center and you are provided with lodging that employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price(You are not entitled to a deduction for a does not meet the three conditions above, you is not included in your income if your employer:charitable contribution for naming a chari- still may not have to include the value of thetable organization as the beneficiary of • Offers the same service for sale to cus-lodging in income. However, the lodging mustyour policy.) tomers in the ordinary course of the line ofbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and: an adequate rent. business in which you work, and
Publication 525 (2009) Page 7

Page 8 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Does not have a substantial additional income. You are not entitled to these exclusions you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in
cost (including any sales income given up) your income.if the reimbursements are made under a com-
to provide you with the service (regardless pensation reduction agreement.
Example. You work as an engineer andof what you paid for the service).
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high- your employer provides you with a subscription
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofGenerally, no-additional-cost services are ex-
including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi- the subscription is not included in your incomecess capacity services, such as airline, bus, or
cle's mileage must reasonably be expected to because the cost would have been allowable totrain tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-
you as a business deduction if you had paid forbe:ices.
the subscription yourself.• For transporting employees between theirExample. You are employed as a flight at- homes and work place, andtendant for a company that owns both an airline
Valuation of Fringe Benefitsand a hotel chain. Your employer allows you to • On trips during which employees occupy
take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied at least half of the vehicle's adult seating
If a fringe benefit is included in your income, theseat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there capacity (not including the driver). amount included is generally its value deter-is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The
mined under the general valuation rule or undervalue of the personal flight is not included in your Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare- the special valuation rules. For an exception,income. However, the value of the hotel room is card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.included in your income because you do not to ride mass transit (whether public or private)work in the hotel business. free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter General valuation rule. You must include in
highway vehicle operated by a person in the your income the amount by which the fair market
business of transporting persons for compensa- value of the fringe benefit is more than the sumRetirement Planning Services tion. of:
If your employer has a qualified retirement plan, 1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-Qualified parking. This is parking provided toqualified retirement planning services provided fit, plusan employee at or near the employer's place ofto you (and your spouse) by your employer are
business. It also includes parking provided on ornot included in your income. Qualified services 2. The amount, if any, specifically excludednear a location from which the employee com-include retirement planning advice, information from your income by law.mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuterabout your employer's retirement plan, and in- If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-formation about how the plan may fit into your no amount is included in your income.clude parking at or near the employee's home.overall individual retirement income plan. You
cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation, Fair market value. The fair market value ofQualified bicycle commuting. This is reim-accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro- a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andbursement based on the number of qualifiedvided by your employer. Also, see Financial circumstances. It is the amount you would havebicycle commuting months for the year. A quali-Counseling Fees, earlier. to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.fied bicycle commuting month is any month you This is determined without regard to:use the bicycle regularly for a substantial portion
• Your perceived value of the benefit, orof the travel between your home and place ofTransportation
employment and you do not receive any of the • The amount your employer paid for theIf your employer provides you with a qualified other qualified transportation fringe benefits. benefit.transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded The reimbursement can be for expenses you
from your income, up to certain limits. A qualified incurred during the year for the purchase of a Employer-provided vehicles. If your em-transportation fringe benefit is: bicycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and ployer provides a car (or other highway motor
storage. vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.hicle (such as a van) between your home
Under the general valuation rules, the valueand work place, Tuition Reduction of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount• A transit pass, you would have to pay a third party to lease theYou can exclude a qualified tuition reduction same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-• Qualified parking, or from your income. This is the amount of a reduc- rable terms in the same geographic area wheretion in tuition:• Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse- you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-ment. • For education (below graduate level) fur- ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle
nished by an educational institution to an is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-Cash reimbursement by your employer for these
employee, former employee who retired or riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-
became disabled, or his or her spouse and plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofrangement is also excludable. However, cash
dependent children. miles driven unless you prove the vehicle couldreimbursement for a transit pass is excludable
have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.only if a voucher or similar item that can be • For education furnished to a graduate stu-exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily Flights on employer-provided aircraft.dent at an educational institution if theavailable for direct distribution to you. Under the general valuation rules, if your flightgraduate student is engaged in teaching
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-or research activities for that institution.Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter marily personal and you control the use of the• Representing payment for teaching, re-vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itsearch, or other services if you receive thebenefits cannot be more than a total of $120 a would cost to charter the flight from a third party.amount under the National Health Servicemonth. However, beginning March 1, 2009, the If there is more than one employee on theCorps Scholarship Program or the Armedamount of the exclusion was increased to $230 flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must beForces Health Professions Scholarshipa month. divided among those employees. The divisionand Financial Assistance program.The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe must be based on all the facts, including which
benefit cannot be more than $230 a month. employee or employees control the use of theFor more information, see Publication 970.
The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut- aircraft.
ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by the Working Condition Benefits
number of qualified bicycle commuting months Special valuation rules. You generally can
that year. If your employer provides you with a product or use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit
service and the cost of it would have been allow-If the benefits have a value that is more than only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-
able as a business or depreciation deduction ifthese limits, the excess must be included in your ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannot
Page 8 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 9 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use a different special rule to value that benefit. tax at the time contributed. However, it is in- Limit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a
cluded in wages subject to social security and participant in a tax-sheltered annuity planYou always can use the general valuation rule
Medicare taxes. (403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals fordiscussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
Elective deferrals include elective contribu- 2009 generally is $16,500. However, if you havestances, even if your employer uses a special
tions to the following retirement plans. at least 15 years of service with a public schoolrule.
system, a hospital, a home health serviceIf you and your employer use a special valua- 1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section agency, a health and welfare service agency, ation rule, you must include in your income the 401(k) plans). church, or a convention or association ofamount your employer determines under the churches (or associated organization), the limit2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-special rule minus the sum of: on elective deferrals is increased by the least ofees.
the following amounts.1. Any amount you repaid your employer, 3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-plus sion plans (SARSEP). 1. $3,000,
2. Any amount specifically excluded from in- 4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- 2. $15,000, reduced by the sum of:come by law. ees (SIMPLE plans).
a. The additional pre-tax elective deferralsThe special valuation rules are the following. 5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). made in earlier years because of this
• The automobile lease rule. rule, plus6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-
porting by employer, later.)• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. b. The aggregate amount of designated
Roth contributions permitted for prior7. Section 457 plans.• The commuting rule.
tax years because of this rule, or
• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange- 3. $5,000 times the number of your years of• The employer-operated eating-facility rule. ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu- service for the organization, minus the total
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you elective deferrals made by your employerFor more information on these rules, see Pub- as having elected to have a part of your compen- on your behalf for earlier years.lication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe sation contributed to a section 401(k) plan.
Benefits. If you qualify for the 15-year rule, your elec-Before each plan year, your employer must give
tive deferrals under this limit can be as high as For information on the non-commercial flight you a written notice of your rights under the
$19,500 for 2009.and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec- arrangement. You can elect to change the
For more information, see Publication 571.tions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula- amount of the contributions or elect out of the
tions. arrangement.
Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18)
plans. If you are a participant in a sectionOverall limit on deferrals. For 2009, you gen-Retirement Plan 501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25,erally should not have deferred more than a totalContributions 1959, funded only by employee contributions),of $16,500 of contributions to the plans listed in
you should have deferred no more than the(1) through (3) above. The specific plan limits forYour employer's contributions to a qualified re- lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation.the plans listed in (4) through (7) above aretirement plan for you are not included in income discussed later.at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.Your employer or plan administrator shouldyou whether your retirement plan is qualified.) If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (aapply the proper annual limit when figuring yourHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage deferred compensation plan for employees ofplan contributions. However, you are responsi-included in the plan may have to be included. state or local governments or tax-exempt orga-ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensureSee Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, under nizations), you should have deferred no morethat the deferrals are not more than the overallFringe Benefits. than the lesser of your includible compensationlimit.
or $16,500. However, if you are within 3 years ofIf your employer pays into a nonqualified
normal retirement age, you may be allowed anplan for you, you generally must include the Catch-up contributions. You may be allowed
increased limit if the plan allows it. See In-contributions in your income as wages for the catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-
creased limit, later.tax year in which the contributions are made. rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of your
However, if your interest in the plan is not trans- tax year. For more information about catch-up Includible compensation. This is the pay
contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 offerable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- you received for the year from the employer who
Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plansture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the maintained the section 457 plan. It generally
(403(b) Plans).time of the contribution, you do not have to includes all the following payments. 
For more information about additional elec-include the value of your interest in your income
1. Wages and salaries.tive deferrals to:until it is transferable or is no longer subject to a
substantial risk of forfeiture. 2. Fees for professional services.• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction
Simplified Employee Pension in Publica-For information on distributions from 3. The value of any employer-provided quali-tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-retirement plans, see Publication 575 fied transportation fringe benefit (definedness.(or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S.
TIP under Transportation, earlier) that is not
Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a included in your income.• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be
federal employee or retiree). Contributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)of Publication 590. for personal services you performed, in-
cluding, but not limited to, the following• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferralsElective Deferrals items.under section 457 plans, later.
If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement a. Commissions and tips.plans, you can choose to have part of your Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans. If
compensation contributed by your employer to a b. Fringe benefits.you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you
retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. generally should not have deferred more than c. Bonuses.The amount you set aside (called an elective $11,500 in 2009.  Amounts you defer under a
deferral) is treated as an employer contribution SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other ($16,500 for 2009) and may affect the amount to:than a designated Roth contribution (discussed you can defer under other elective deferral
later), is not included in wages subject to income plans. a. The section 457 plan.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 9

Page 10 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange- employer should mark the Retirement plan • If the distribution was for a 2009 excess
ments (section 401(k) plans) that are deferral to a designated Roth account,checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount
not included in your income. your Form 1099-R should have code ªBº indeferred in box 12.
box 7. Do not add this amount to yourSection 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.c. A salary reduction simplified employee wages on your 2009 return.Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 shouldpension (SARSEP).
not have been reduced for contributions you • If the distribution was for a 2008 excessd. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b) made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan. deferral, your Form 1099-R should haveplan). the code ªPº in box 7. If you did not addThe amount you contributed should be identified
e. A savings incentive match plan for em- the excess deferral amount to your wageswith code ªHº in box 12. You may deduct the
ployees (SIMPLE plan). on your 2008 tax return, you must file anamount deferred subject to the limits that apply.
amended return on Form 1040X,Include your deduction in the total on Formf. A section 125 cafeteria plan. Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-1040, line 36. Enter the amount and
turn. If you did not receive the distributionª501(c)(18)(D)º on the dotted line next to line 36.Instead of using the amounts listed earlier to by April 15, 2009, you also must add it todetermine your includible compensation, your Designated Roth contributions.  These your wages on your 2009 tax return.employer can use any of the following amounts. contributions are elective deferrals but are in-
• If the distribution was for a 2007 excesscluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2.• Your wages as defined for income tax deferral, your Form 1099-R should haveDesignated Roth contributions to a sectionwithholding purposes. the code ªDº in box 7. If you did not add401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box
• Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form the excess deferral amount to your wages12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in box
W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. on your 2007 tax return, you must file an12.
amended return on Form 1040X. You also• Your wages that are subject to social se- must add it to your wages on your 2009Excess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed thecurity withholding (including elective defer- income tax return.limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-rals). quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex- • If the distribution was for the incomecess amount will be distributed to you. If youIncreased limit. During any, or all, of the earned on an excess deferral, your Formparticipate in more than one plan, you can havelast 3 years ending before you reach normal 1099-R should have the code ª8º in box 7.the excess paid out of any of the plans thatretirement age under the plan, your plan may Add the income amount to your wages onpermit these distributions. You must notify eachprovide that your limit is the lesser of: your 2009 income tax return, regardless ofplan by the date required by that plan of the when the excess deferral was made.amount to be paid from that particular plan. The1. Twice the annual limit ($33,000 for 2009),
Report a loss on a corrective distribution of anplan then must pay you the amount of the ex-or
excess deferral in the year the excess amountcess, along with any income earned on that2. The basic annual limit plus the amount of (reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-amount, by April 15 of the following year.the basic limit not used in prior years (only clude the loss as a negative amount on FormYou must include the excess deferral in yourallowed if not using age 50 or over 1040, line 21 and identify it as ªLoss on Excessincome for the year of the deferral unless youcatch-up contributions). Deferral Distribution.ºhave an excess deferral of a designated Roth
contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excessCatch-up contributions. You generally Even though a corrective distribution ofdeferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do notcan have additional elective deferrals made to excess deferrals is reported on Formuse Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-your governmental section 457 plan if: 1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as a
TIPcess deferral amounts.
distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled• You reached age 50 by the end of the Excess not distributed. If you do not take over into another plan, and it is not subject to theyear, and out the excess amount, you cannot include it in additional tax on early distributions.• No other elective deferrals can be made the cost of the contract even though you in-
for you to the plan for the year because of cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are
limits or restrictions. taxed twice on the excess deferral left in the Excess ContributionsplanÐonce when you contribute it, and againIf you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your
when you receive it as a distribution. If you are a highly compensated employee, theincludible compensation or $16,500, plus
total of your elective deferrals and other contri-$5,500. However, if you are within 3 years of Excess distributed to you. If you take out butions made for you for any year under a sec-retirement age and your plan provides the in- the excess after the year of the deferral and you tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as acreased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may be receive the corrective distribution by April 15 of percentage of pay, no more than 125% of thehigher. the following year, do not include it in income average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligibleagain in the year you receive it. If you receive it non-highly compensated employees.Designated Roth contributions. Employers later, you must include it in income in both the  If the total contributed to the plan is morewith section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans can year of the deferral and the year you receive it. than the amount allowed under the ADP test, thecreate qualified Roth contribution programs so Any income on the excess deferral taken out is excess contributions must be either distributedthat you may elect to have part or all of your taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. If to you or recharacterized as after-tax employeeelective deferrals to the plan designated as af- you take out part of the excess deferral and the contributions by treating them as distributed toter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth income on it, allocate the distribution proportion- you and then contributed by you to the plan. Youcontributions are treated as elective deferrals, ately between the excess deferral and the in- must include the excess contributions in yourexcept that they are included in income. Your come. income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. Youretirement plan must maintain separate ac- You should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu- cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ tocounts and recordkeeping for the designated tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or report excess contribution amounts.Roth contributions. Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- If you receive a corrective distribution of ex-Qualified distributions from a Roth plan are tracts, etc., for the year in which the excess cess contributions (and allocable income), it isnot included in income. Generally, a distribution deferral is distributed to you. Use the following included in your income in the year of the distri-made before the end of the 5-tax-year period rules to report a corrective distribution shown on bution. The allocable income is the amount ofbeginning with the first tax year for which you Form 1099-R for 2009. gain or loss through the end of the plan year formade a designated Roth contribution to the plan
• If the distribution was for a 2009 excess which the contribution was made that is alloca-is not a qualified distribution.
deferral, your Form 1099-R should have ble to the excess contributions. You should re-
the code ª8º in box 7. Add the excessReporting by employer. Your employer gen- ceive a Form 1099-R for the year the excess
deferral amount to your wages on yourerally should not include elective deferrals in contributions are distributed to you. Add the dis-
2009 tax return.your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, your tribution to your wages for that year.
Page 10 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 11 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Even though a corrective distribution of • You can exercise the option immediately difference in income when the option becomes
excess contributions is reported on in full. substantially vested. For more information on
Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise restricted property, see Restricted Property,
TIP• The option or the property subject to thetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot later.option is not subject to any condition orbe rolled over into another plan, and it is not restriction (other than a condition to se- Transfer in arm's-length transaction. Ifsubject to the additional tax on early distribu- cure payment of the purchase price) that you transfer a nonstatutory stock option withouttions. has a significant effect on the fair market a readily determinable value in an arm's-length
value of the option. transaction to an unrelated person, you must
include in your income the money or other prop-• The fair market value of the option privi-Excess Annual Additions erty you received for the transfer, as if you hadlege can be readily determined. exercised the option.The amount contributed in 2009 to a defined The option privilege for an option to buy is the Transfer in non-arm's-length transaction.contribution plan is generally limited to the opportunity to benefit during the option's exer- If you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with-lesser of 100% of your compensation or cise period from any increase in the value of out a readily determinable value in a$49,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu- property subject to the option without risking any non-arm's-length transaction (for example, ations that exceed these limits (excess annual capital. For example, if during the exercise pe- gift), the option is not treated as exercised oradditions) may be corrected by a distribution of riod the fair market value of stock subject to an closed at that time. You must include in youryour elective deferrals or a return of your af- option is greater than the option's exercise price, income, as compensation, any money or prop-ter-tax contributions and earnings from these a profit may be realized by exercising the option erty received. When the transferee exercisescontributions. and immediately selling the stock at its higher the option, you must include in your income, asA corrective payment of excess annual addi- value. The option privilege for an option to sell is compensation, the excess of the fair markettions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings the opportunity to benefit during the exercise value of the stock acquired by the transfereefrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxable period from a decrease in the value of the prop- over the sum of the exercise price paid and anyin the year paid. A corrective payment consisting erty subject to the option. amount you included in income at the time youof your after-tax contributions is not taxable.
transferred the option. At the time of the exer-If you received a corrective payment of ex- If you or a member of your family is an cise, the transferee recognizes no income andcess annual additions, you should receive a officer, director, or more-than-10% has a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fairseparate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay- owner of an expatriated corporation,
CAUTION
! market value of the stock.ment with the code ªEº in box 7. Report the total you may owe an excise tax on the value of Any transfer of this kind of option to a relatedpayment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on line nonstatutory options and other stock-based person is treated as a non-arm's-length transac-16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A. compensation from that corporation. For more tion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the defi-Report the taxable amount shown in box 2a of information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve- nition of a related person.Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or line nue Code section 4985.
12b of Form 1040A. Recourse note in satisfaction of the exer-
Option with readily determinable value. If cise price of an option. If you are an em-Even though a corrective distribution of you receive a nonstatutory stock option that has ployee, and you issue a recourse note to yourexcess annual additions is reported on a readily determinable fair market value at the employer in satisfaction of the exercise price ofForm 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP time it is granted to you, the option is treated like an option to acquire your employer's stock, andtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot other property received as compensation. See your employer and you subsequently agree tobe rolled over into another plan, and it is not Restricted Property, later, for rules on how much reduce the stated principal amount of the note,subject to the additional tax on early distribu- income to include and when to include it. How- you generally recognize compensation incometions. ever, the rule described in that discussion for at the time and in the amount of the reduction.
choosing to include the value of property in your
income for the year of the transfer does not Tax form. If you receive compensation fromStock Options
apply to a nonstatutory option. employer-provided nonstatutory stock options, it
If you receive an option to buy or sell stock or is reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also isOption without readily determinable value.other property as payment for your services, you reported in box 12 using code ªV.ºIf the fair market value of the option is not readilymay have income when you receive the option  If you are a nonemployee spouse and youdeterminable at the time it is granted to you(the grant), when you exercise the option (use it exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-(even if it is determined later), you do not haveto buy or sell the stock or other property), or ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-income until you exercise or transfer the option.when you sell or otherwise dispose of the option ported to you on Form 1099-MISC,
Exercise or transfer of option. When youor property acquired through exercise of the Miscellaneous Income, in box 3.
exercise a nonstatutory stock option, theoption. The timing, type, and amount of income
amount to include in your income depends oninclusion depend on whether you receive a non- Sale of the stock. There are no special in-
whether the option had a readily determinablestatutory stock option or a statutory stock option. come rules for the sale of stock acquired through
value.Your employer can tell you which kind of option the exercise of a nonstatutory stock option. Re-
you hold. port the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capi-Option with readily determinable value. tal Gains and Losses, for the year of the sale.When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option You may receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds fromthat had a readily determinable value at the timeNonstatutory Stock Options Broker and Barter Sale Transactions, reportingthe option was granted, you do not have to the sales proceeds.include any amount in income.
Your basis in the property you acquire underGrant of option. If you are granted a nonstat- Option without readily determinable value. the option is the amount you pay for it plus anyutory stock option, you may have income when When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option amount you included in income upon grant oryou receive the option. The amount of income to that did not have a readily determinable value at exercise of the option.include and the time to include it depend on the time the option was granted, the restricted Your holding period begins as of the date youwhether the fair market value of the option can property rules apply to the property received. acquired the option, if it had a readily determina-be readily determined. The fair market value of The amount to include in your income is the ble value, or as of the date you exercised oran option can be readily determined if it is ac- difference between the amount you pay for the transferred the option, if it had no readily deter-tively traded on an established market. property and its fair market value when it be- minable value.The fair market value of an option that is not comes substantially vested. If it is not substan-traded on an established market can be readily tially vested at the time you exercise thisdetermined only if all of the following conditions nonstatutory stock option (so that you may have Statutory Stock Optionsexist. to give the stock back), you do not have to
• You can transfer the option. include any amount in income. You include the There are two kinds of statutory stock options.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 11

Page 12 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and • You do not satisfy the holding period re- Holding period requirement satisfied. If
quirement. you sold stock acquired by exercising an option• Options granted under employee stock granted under an employee stock purchasepurchase plans. • You satisfy the conditions described under plan, and you satisfy the holding period require-Option granted at a discount, under Em- ment, determine your ordinary income as fol-For either kind of option, you must be an ployee stock purchase plan, later.
lows.employee of the company granting the option, or Report your ordinary income as wages on Form Your basis is equal to the option price at thea related company, at all times during the period 1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. time you exercised your option and acquired thebeginning on the date the option is granted and
stock. The timing and amount of pay periodending 3 months before the date you exercise Holding period requirement. You satisfy
the option (for an incentive stock option, 1 year the holding period requirement if you do not sell deductions do not affect your basis.
before if you are disabled). Also, the option must the stock until the end of the later of the 1-year Your holding period for the property you ac-
be nontransferable except at death. period after the stock was transferred to you or quire when you exercise an option begins on the
 If you do not meet the employment require- the 2-year period after the option was granted. day after you exercise the option.
ments, or you receive a transferable option, your However, you are considered to satisfy the hold-
option is a nonstatutory stock option. ing period requirement if you sold the stock to Example. XYZ Company has an employee
comply with conflict-of-interest requirements. stock purchase plan. The option price is theGrant of option. If you receive a statutory lower of the stock price at the time the option isstock option, do not include any amount in your Incentive stock options (ISOs). If you sell granted or at the time the option is exercised.income when the option is granted. stock acquired by exercising an ISO, you need The value of the stock when the option wasto determine if you satisfied the holding period granted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A's payExercise of option. If you exercise a statutory requirement. every week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 ×  48)).stock option, do not include any amount in in-
Holding period requirement satisfied. If The value of the stock when the option is exer-come when you exercise the option.
you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO and cised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ stockAlternative minimum tax (AMT). For the satisfy the holding period requirement, your gain ($240 ÷  $20). A's holding period for all 12 sharesAMT, you must treat stock acquired through the or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. begins the day after the option is exercised,exercise of an ISO as if no special treatment Report the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040). even though the money used to purchase theapplied. This means that, when your rights in the The basis of your stock is the amount you paid shares was deducted from A's pay on 48 sepa-stock are transferable or no longer subject to a for the stock. rate days. A's basis in each share is $20.substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as
Holding period requirement not satisfied.an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum Option granted at a discount. If, at theIf you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO,taxable income the amount by which the fair time the option was granted, the option price perdo not satisfy the holding period requirement,market value of the stock exceeds the option share was less than 100% (but not less thanand have a gain from the sale, the gain is ordi-price. Enter this adjustment on line 15 of Form 85%) of the fair market value of the share, andnary income up to the amount by which the6251, Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-stock's fair market value when you exercised theIncrease your AMT basis in any stock you ac- ing period requirement, or you die while owningoption exceeded the option price. Any excessquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the the share, you must include in your income asgain is capital gain. If you have a loss from theadjustment. However, no adjustment is required compensation, the lesser of:sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have anyif you dispose of the stock in the same year you
ordinary income. • The excess of the fair market value of theexercise the option.
Report the ordinary income as wages on line share at the time the option was grantedSee Restricted Property, later, for more infor-
7, Form 1040. Report the capital gain or loss onmation. over the option price, or
Schedule D (Form 1040). In determining capitalYour AMT basis in stock acquired • The excess of the fair market value of thegain or loss, your basis is the amount you paidthrough an ISO is likely to differ from share at the time of the disposition orwhen you exercised the option plus the amountyour regular tax basis. Therefore, keep death over the amount paid for the share
RECORDSreported as wages.adequate records for both the AMT and regular under the option.
tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or Example. Your employer, X Corporation, For this purpose, if the option price was not fixedloss. granted you an ISO on March 12, 2007, to buy or determinable at the time the option was100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a granted, the option price is figured as if theExample. Your employer, M Company, share, its fair market value at the time. You option had been exercised at the time it wasgranted you an incentive stock option on April 6, exercised the option on January 4, 2008, when granted.2007, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 a the stock was selling on the open market for $12
share, its fair market value at the time. You Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have aa share. On January 26, 2009, you sold the
exercised the option on January 9, 2008, when stock for $15 a share. Although you held the loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you do
the stock was selling on the open market for $14 stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had not have any ordinary income.
a share. On January 26, 2009, when the stock passed from the time you were granted the op-
was selling on the open market for $16 a share, tion. In 2009, you must report the difference Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,
your rights to the stock first became transfera- between the option price ($10) and the value of granted you an option under its employee stock
ble. You include $700 ($1,600 value when your the stock when you exercised the option ($12) purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Y
rights first became transferable minus $900 op- as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, Corporation for $20 a share at a time when the
tion price) as an adjustment on Form 6251, line figured as follows: stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteen
15. months later, when the value of the stock wasSelling price ($15 ×  100 shares) .... . $ 1,500 $23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14Sale of the stock. You have taxable income Purchase price ($10 ×  100 shares) .. . −1,000 months after that you sold your stock for $30 aor a deductible loss when you sell the stock that Gain ...................... . $ 500 share. In the year of sale, you must report asyou bought by exercising the option. Your in- Amount reported as wages wages the difference between the option pricecome or loss is the difference between the [($12 ×  100 shares) − $1,000] ..... . − 200
($20) and the value at the time the option wasamount you paid for the stock (the option price) Amount reported as capital gain $ 300 granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 perand the amount you receive when you sell it.
share) is capital gain, figured as follows: You generally treat this amount as capital gain
or loss and report it on Schedule D (Form 1040) Employee stock purchase plan. If you sold
for the year of the sale. stock acquired by exercising an option granted
However, you may have ordinary income for under an employee stock purchase plan, you
the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of the need to determine if you satisfied the holding
stock in either of the following situations. period requirement.
Page 12 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 13 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $ 3,000 a share. You must include $19,000 in your in- 30 days after the date the property was trans-
Purchase price (option price) come [100 shares ×  ($200 fair market value − ferred. A copy of the statement must be attached
($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000 $10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor- to your tax return for the year the property was
Gain ..................... . $ 1,000 poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxable transferred. You also must give a copy of this
Amount reported as wages to you as additional compensation during the statement to the person for whom you per-
[($22 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 200 period the stock can be forfeited. formed the services and, if someone other than
you received the property, to that person.Amount reported as capital gain $ 800 Substantially vested. Property is substan- You must sign the statement and indicate on
tially vested when: it that you are making the choice under sectionHolding period requirement not satisfied.
83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-If you do not satisfy the holding period require- • It is transferable, or
ment must contain all of the following informa-ment, your ordinary income is the amount by • It is not subject to a substantial risk of tion.which the stock's fair market value when you forfeiture. (You do not have a goodexercised the option exceeded the option price. • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-chance of losing it.)This ordinary income is not limited to your gain cation number.
from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis in Transferable property. Property is trans- • A description of each property for whichthe stock by the amount of this ordinary income. ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge your you are making the choice.The difference between your increased basis interest in the property to any person (other thanand the selling price of the stock is a capital gain • The date or dates on which the propertythe transferor), and if the person receiving youror loss. was transferred and the tax year for whichinterest in the property is not required to give up
you are making the choice.the property, or its value, if the substantial risk ofExample.   The facts are the same as in the forfeiture occurs. • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-previous example, except that you sold the
erty.stock only 6 months after you exercised the Substantial risk of forfeiture. A substan-
option. You did not satisfy the holding period tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the • The fair market value at the time of trans-requirement, so you must report $300 as wages property transferred depend on performing (or fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatand $700 as capital gain, figured as follows: not performing) substantial services, or on a will never lapse) of each property for
condition related to the transfer, and the possi- which you are making the choice.Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $3,000 bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
• Any amount that you paid for the property.Purchase price (option price) not satisfied.
($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000 • A statement that you have provided copiesGain ..................... . $1,000 Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to to the appropriate persons.Amount reported as wages you as compensation for services 100 shares of[($23 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 300 its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the
Dividends received on restricted stock.terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock toAmount reported as capital gain Dividends you receive on restricted stock arethe corporation at $100 a share if you leave your [$3,000 ± ($2,000 + $300)] $700 treated as compensation and not as dividendjob for any reason within 3 years from the date of
income. Your employer should include thesetransfer. You must perform substantial services
payments on your Form W-2. If they also areRestricted Property over a period of time and you must resell the
reported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends andstock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-
Distributions, you should list them on ScheduleGenerally, if you receive property for your serv- less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-
B (Form 1040A or 1040) with a statement thatices, you must include its fair market value in ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to a
you have included them as wages. Do not in-your income in the year you receive the prop- substantial risk of forfeiture.
clude them in the total dividends received.erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-
Choosing to include in income for year oferty that has certain restrictions that affect its Stock you chose to include in your in-transfer. You can choose to include the valuevalue, you do not include the value of the prop- come. Dividends you receive on restrictedof restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-erty in your income until it has been substantially stock you chose to include in your income in thenus any amount you paid for the property) invested. (You can choose to include the value of year transferred are treated the same as anyyour income for the year it is transferred. If youthe property in your income in the year it is other dividends. You should receive a Formmake this choice, the substantial vesting rulestransferred to you, as discussed later, rather 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia-than the year it is substantially vested.) clude the dividends in your wages on your re-tion in value is not included in your compensa-Until the property becomes substantially turn. Report them as dividends.tion when the property becomes substantiallyvested, it is owned by the person who makes the
vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss whentransfer to you, usually your employer. However, Sale of property not substantially vested.
you sell the property is the amount you paid for itany income from the property, or the right to use These rules apply to the sale or other disposition
plus the amount you included in income as com-the property, is included in your income as addi- of property that you did not choose to include in
pensation.tional compensation in the year you receive the your income in the year transferred and that is
income or have the right to use the property. not substantially vested.If you make this choice, you cannot
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-When the property becomes substantially revoke it without the consent of the
erty in an arm's-length transaction, include invested, you must include its fair market value, Internal Revenue Service. Consent will
CAUTION
!
your income as compensation for the year ofminus any amount you paid for it, in your income be given only if you were under a mistake of fact
sale the amount realized minus the amount youfor that year. Your holding period for this prop- as to the underlying transaction.
paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-erty begins when the property becomes sub- If you forfeit the property after you have in- erty in an arm's-length transaction for otherstantially vested. cluded its value in income, your loss is the property that is not substantially vested, treat theamount you paid for the property minus anyExample. Your employer, the RST Corpo- new property as if it were substituted for theamount you realized on the forfeiture.ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a exchanged property.
share. At the time of the sale the fair market The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-You cannot make this choice for a non-
value of the stock is $100 a share. Under the tory stock option to a related person is not con-statutory stock option.
terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial sidered an arm's-length transaction. See
CAUTION
!
risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of a
losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not related person.
substantially vested when it is transferred, so How to make the choice. You make the If you sell the property in a transaction that is
you do not include any amount in your income in choice by filing a written statement with the Inter- not at arm's length, include in your income as
the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year nal Revenue Service Center where you file your compensation for the year of sale the total of any
period, the fair market value of the stock is $200 return. You must file this statement no later than money you received and the fair market value of
Publication 525 (2009) Page 13

Page 14 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any substantially vested property you received Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of aHousing
religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.on the sale. In addition, you will have to report
Special rules for housing apply to members of He renounces all claims to his earnings andincome when the original property becomes
the clergy. Under these rules, you do not include turns over his earnings to the order.substantially vested, as if you still held it. Report in your income the rental value of a home (in- Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedas compensation its fair market value minus the cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow- by the superiors of the order to get a job with atotal of the amount you paid for the property and ance provided to you as part of your pay. private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-the amount included in your income from the However, the exclusion cannot be more than the ployee of the school, and, at his request, theearlier sale. reasonable pay for your service. If you pay for school made the salary payments directly to thethe utilities, you can exclude any allowance des- order.Example. In 2006, you paid your employer ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. Because Mark is an employee of the school,$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market The home or allowance must be provided as he is performing services for the school rathervalue of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until compensation for your services as an ordained, than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark2009. In 2008, you sold the stock to your spouse licensed, or commissioned minister. However, earns working for the school are included in hisfor $10 in a transaction not at arm's length. You you must include the rental value of the home or income.had compensation of $10 from this transaction. the housing allowance as earnings from
In 2009, when the stock had a fair market value self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040), Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of aof $120, it became substantially vested. For Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to the religious order who, as a condition of member-2009, you must report additional compensation self-employment tax. For more information, see ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.of $60, figured as follows: Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor- All claims to his earnings are renounced. Genemation for Members of the Clergy and Religious received permission from the order to establishFair market value of stock at time Workers. a private practice as a psychologist and coun-of substantial vesting ....... . $120 sels members of religious orders as well asMinus: Amount paid for stock .. . $50 Members of Religious Orders nonmembers. Although the order reviewsMinus: Compensation previously
Gene's budget annually, Gene controls not onlyincluded in income from sale to If you are a member of a religious order who has the details of his practice but also the means byspouse ................. . 10 −60 taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings which his work as a psychologist is accom-Additional income $60 that you renounce and turn over to the order plished.depends on whether your services are per- Gene's private practice as a psychologistformed for the order.Inherited property not substantially vested. does not make him an agent of the religious
If you inherit property not substantially vested at order. The psychological services provided byServices performed for the order. If you arethe time of the decedent's death, any income Gene are not the type of services that are pro-performing the services as an agent of the orderyou receive from the property is considered in- vided by the order. The income Gene earns as ain the exercise of duties required by the order,come in respect of a decedent and is taxed psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.do not include in your income the amountsaccording to the rules for restricted property Gene must include in his income the earningsturned over to the order.received for services. For information about in- from his private practice.
If your order directs you to perform servicescome in respect of a decedent, see Publication
for another agency of the supervising church or559. Foreign Employer
an associated institution, you are considered to
be performing the services as an agent of the Special rules apply if you work for a foreign
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an employer.
order that you turn over to the order are notSpecial Rules for included in your income. U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who
works in the United States for a foreign govern-Certain Employees Example. You are a member of a church ment, an international organization, a foreignorder and have taken a vow of poverty. You embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustThis part of the publication deals with special renounce any claims to your earnings and turn include your salary in your income.rules for people in certain types of employment: over to the order any salaries or wages youmembers of the clergy, members of religious Social security and Medicare taxes. Youearn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderorders, people working for foreign employers, are exempt from social security and Medicareassigns you to work in a hospital that is anmilitary personnel, and volunteers. employee taxes if you are employed in theassociated institution of the church. However,
United States by an international organization oryou remain under the general direction and con-
Clergy a foreign government. However, you must paytrol of the order. You are considered to be an
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-agent of the order and any wages you earn at
If you are a member of the clergy, you must ices performed in the United States, eventhe hospital that you turn over to your order are
include in your income offerings and fees you though you are not self-employed. This rule alsonot included in your income.
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, applies if you are an employee of a qualifying
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-Services performed outside the order. Ifoffering is made to the religious institution, it is ernment.you are directed to work outside the order, your
not taxable to you. services are not an exercise of duties required
Employees of international organizations orIf you are a member of a religious organiza- by the order unless they meet both of the follow-
foreign governments. Your compensationtion and you give your outside earnings to the ing requirements.
for official services to an international organiza-organization, you still must include the earnings • They are the kind of services that are ordi- tion is exempt from federal income tax if you arein your income. However, you may be entitled to narily the duties of members of the order. not a citizen of the United States or you are aa charitable contribution deduction for the
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are• They are part of the duties that you mustamount paid to the organization. See Publica-
a citizen of the United States).exercise for, or on behalf of, the religioustion 526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see
order as its agent. Your compensation for official services to aMembers of Religious Orders, later.
foreign government is exempt from federal in-If you are an employee of a third party, the come tax if all of the following are true.Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a services you perform for the third party will not
member of the clergy usually is treated as any be considered directed or required of you by the • You are not a citizen of the United States
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on order. Amounts you receive for these services or you are a citizen of the Philippines
lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a are included in your income, even if you have (whether or not you are a citizen of the
and 12b of Form 1040A. taken a vow of poverty. United States).
Page 14 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 15 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your work is like the work done by em- • Education, training, and subsistence al- Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
ployees of the United States in foreign volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentlowances.
countries. allowance during his period of service, to be paid• Disability compensation and pension pay- to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of• The foreign government gives an equal ments for disabilities paid either to veter- duty. Although the allowance is not available toexemption to employees of the United ans or their families. him until the end of his service, Gary must in-States in its country. clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair
credited to his account.living.Waiver of alien status. If you are an alien
who works for a foreign government or interna- • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If
tional organization and you file a waiver under lost their sight or the use of their limbs. you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary income as wages.dends paid either to veterans or their ben-you receive after the date you file the waiver is eficiaries, including the proceeds of a National Senior Service Corps programs.not exempt under this rule. However, it may be veteran's endowment policy paid before Do not include in your income amounts youexempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi- death. receive for supportive services or reimburse-cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-information about treaties. • Interest on insurance dividends left on de- lowing programs.posit with the VA.Nonwage income. This exemption applies • Retired Senior Volunteer Programonly to employees' wages, salaries, and fees. • Benefits under a dependent-care assis- (RSVP).Pensions and other income do not qualify for this tance program.
exemption. • Foster Grandparent Program.• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a
• Senior Companion Program. member of the Armed Forces who diedEmployment abroad. For information on the
after September 10, 2001.tax treatment of income earned abroad, see
Publication 54. Service Corps of Retired Executives• Payments made under the compensated
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-work therapy program.
ive services or reimbursements forMilitary • Any bonus payment by a state or political out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notsubdivision because of service in a com-Payments you receive as a member of a military include these amounts in gross income.bat zone.service generally are taxed as wages except for Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include inretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. your income any reimbursements you receiveNote. If, in a previous year, you received aAllowances generally are not taxed. For more for transportation, meals, and other expensesbonus payment by a state or political subdivisioninformation on the tax treatment of military al- you have in training for, or actually providing,because of service in a combat zone that youlowances and benefits, see Publication 3, volunteer federal income tax counseling for theincluded in your income, you can file a claim forArmed Forces' Tax Guide. elderly (TCE).refund of the taxes on that income. Use Form
You can deduct as a charitable contribution1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income TaxDifferential wage payments. Any payments
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inReturn, to file the claim. File a separate form formade to you by an employer during the time you
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-each tax year involved. Generally, you must fileare performing service in the uniformed services
tance (VITA) program.your claim within 3 years after the date you filedare treated as compensation. These wages are
your original return or within 2 years after thesubject to income tax withholding and are re- Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi-date you paid the tax, whichever is later. See theported on Form W-2. See the discussion under cal responders. If you are a volunteerInstructions for Form 1040X for information onMiscellaneous Compensation, earlier. firefighter or emergency medical responder, dofiling that form. not include in your income the following benefits
Military retirement pay. If your retirement you receive from a state or local government.
pay is based on age or length of service, it is Volunteers • Rebates or reductions of property or in-taxable and must be included in your income as
come taxes you receive because of serv-The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aa pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or
ices you performed as a volunteervolunteer is covered in the following discus-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
firefighter or emergency medical re-sions.include in your income the amount of any reduc-
sponder.tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a
Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivesurvivor annuity for your spouse or children • Payments you receive because of serv-as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderunder the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec- ices you performed as a volunteerfor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. firefighter or emergency medical re-and clothing are exempt from tax.For a more detailed discussion of survivor sponder, up to $30 for each month you
annuities, see Publication 575. provided services.Taxable allowances. The following al-
lowances must be included in your income andDisability. If you are retired on disability, The excluded income reduces any related tax orreported as wages.see Military and Government Disability Pen- contribution deduction.
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. • Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
children while you are a volunteer leaderQualified reservist distribution (QRD). If training in the United States.you received a QRD of all or part of the balance Business and • Living allowances designated by the Di-in your health flexible spending account be-
rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-cause you are a reservist and you have been Investment Incomepensation. These are allowances forordered or called to active duty for a period of
personal items such as domestic help,180 days or more, the QRD is treated as wages This section provides information on the treat-laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-and is reportable on Form W-2. ment of income from certain rents and royalties,tainment and recreation, transportation, and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in- and other miscellaneous expenses. rations.come any veterans' benefits paid under any law, • Leave allowances.regulation, or administrative practice adminis- Income from sales at auctions, includ-
• Readjustment allowances or terminationtered by the Department of Veterans Affairs ing online auctions, may be business
payments. These are considered received(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or income. For more information, see
CAUTION
!
by you when credited to your account.their families are not taxable. Publication 334.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 15

Page 16 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the depletion allowance. For information on this Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). You should re-Rents From Personal
subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535. ceive from each partnership in which you are aProperty member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,If you rent out personal property, such as equip- stances, you can treat amounts you receive etc., showing your share of income, deductions,ment or vehicles, how you report your income from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- credits, and tax preference items of the partner-and expenses is generally determined by: ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for yourthan as royalty income. For information about• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,ness, and see Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi- Partner's return. You generally must report• Whether or not the rental activity is con- tion of Assets. partnership items on your individual return theducted for profit. Sale of property interest. If you sell your same way as they are reported on the partner-
Generally, if your primary purpose is income or complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, ship return. That is, if the partnership had a
profit and you are involved in the rental activity the amount you receive is considered payment capital gain, you report your share on Schedule
with continuity and regularity, your rental activity for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-
is a business. See Publication 535, Business income. Under certain circumstances, the sale ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Form
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on 1040).
both business and not-for-profit activities. Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 will tell you where to report each item ofReporting business income and expenses. of Publication 544. income on your individual return.If you are in the business of renting personal
TIP If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,property, report your income and expenses on or a net profit interest in a mineral property forSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The Qualified joint venture. If you and yourthe life of the property, you have made a lease orform instructions have information on how to spouse each materially participate as the onlya sublease, and any cash you receive for thecomplete them. members of a jointly owned and operated busi-assignment of other interests in the property is
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year,ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are you can make a joint election to be treated as aance.not in the business of renting personal property, qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.Part of future production sold. If you ownreport your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. To make this election, you must divide all itemsmineral property but sell part of the future pro-List the type and amount of the income on the of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-duction, you generally treat the money you re-dotted line next to line 21. tributable to the business between you and yourceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a spouse in accordance with your respective inter-Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your ests in the venture. Each of you must file arent personal property for profit, include your income or take depletion based on it. separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formrental expenses in the total amount you enter on When production begins, you include all the 1040).Form 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount and proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that S Corporation IncomeIf you do not rent personal property for profit, amount to arrive at your taxable income from the
your deductions are limited and you cannot re- property. In general, an S corporation does not pay tax onport a loss to offset other income. See Activity its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-not for profit under Other Income in the discus- Partnership Income tions, and credits of the corporation are passedsion of Miscellaneous Income, later. through to the shareholders based on each
A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. shareholder's pro rata share. You must report
The income, gains, losses, deductions, andRoyalties your share of these items on your return. Gener-
credits of a partnership are passed through to ally, the items passed through to you will in-
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, the partners based on each partner's distributive crease or decrease the basis of your S
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary share of these items. For more information, see corporation stock as appropriate.
income. Publication 541.
  You generally report royalties in Part I of S corporation return. An S corporation must
Partner's distributive share. Your distribu-Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax
tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, Return for an S Corporation. This shows the
deductions, or credits generally is based on thegas, or mineral interest or are in business as a results of the corporation's operations for its tax
partnership agreement. You must report yourself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report year and the items of income, losses, deduc-
distributive share of these items on your returnyour income and expenses on Schedule C or tions, or credits that affect the shareholders'
whether or not they actually are distributed toSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). individual income tax returns.
you. However, your distributive share of the
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldCopyrights and patents. Royalties from partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-
receive from the S corporation in which you arecopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, sis of your partnership interest at the end of the
a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Formand similar property, or from patents on inven- partnership year in which the losses took place.
1120S), Shareholder's Share of Income, Deduc-tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use Partnership agreement. The partnership tions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-your work over a specified period of time. Royal- agreement usually covers the distribution of come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the Sties generally are based on the number of units profits, losses, and other items. However, if the corporation for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a agreement does not state how a specific item of for your records. Do not attach it to your Formperformance, or machines sold. gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation 1040.
stated in the agreement does not have substan-Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from tial economic effect, your distributive share is Shareholder's return. Your distributive shareoil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount figured according to your interest in the partner- of the items of income, losses, deductions, oryou receive when natural resources are ex- ship. credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-tracted from your property. The royalties are
arately on your Form 1040. The character ofbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and Partnership return. Although a partnership these items generally is the same as if you hadare paid to you by a person or company who generally pays no tax, it must file an information realized or incurred them personally.leases the property from you. return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership
Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- Income. This shows the result of the partner-
will tell you where to report each item ofnomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas ship's operations for its tax year and the items
income on your individual return.
TIPwells, you can recover your investment through that must be passed through to the partners.
Page 16 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 17 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Distributions. Generally, S corporation dis- on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more the pension had been based on a percentage of
tributions are a nontaxable return of your basis information on pensions and annuities, see Pub- disability. You must include the rest of your pen-
in the corporation stock. However, in certain lication 575. sion in your income.
cases, part of the distributions may be taxable Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you Retroactive VA determination. If you retireas a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term receive payments from a retirement or from the armed services based on years of serv-capital gain, or as both. The corporation's distri- profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- ice and are later given a retroactive serv-butions may be in the form of cash or property. bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your
disability pension. The payments must be re-More information.   For more information, see retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
ported as a pension or annuity.the Instructions for Form 1120S. cluded from income up to the amount of VA
disability benefits you would have been entitledAccrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxbility, any lump-sum payment you receive for paid on the excludable amount (subject to theaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. The statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-Sickness and payment is not a disability payment. Include it in turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearyour income in the tax year you receive it. during the retroactive period.Injury Benefits
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Generally, you must report as income any Military and Government ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severanceamount you receive for personal injury or sick- Disability Pensions benefit from your income. However, you mustness through an accident or health plan that is
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-paid for by your employer. If both you and your Certain military and government disability pen-
ment or other nondisability severance paymentemployer pay for the plan, only the amount you sions are not taxable.
you received on release from active duty, even ifreceive that is due to your employer's payments Service-connected disability. You may be you are later given a retroactive disability ratingis reported as income. However, certain pay- able to exclude from income amounts you re- by the VA.ments may not be taxable to you. For informa- ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowancetion on nontaxable payments, see Military and Special statute of limitations. Generally,for personal injury or sickness resulting fromGovernment Disability Pensions and Other under the statute of limitations a claim for creditactive service in one of the following govern-Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus- or refund must be filed within 3 years from thement services.sion. time a return was filed. However, if you receive a
• The armed forces of any country. retroactive service-connected disability ratingDo not report as income any amounts
determination, the statute of limitations is ex-paid to reimburse you for medical ex- • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
tended by a 1-year period beginning on the datepenses you incurred after the plan was Administration.
TIP
of the determination. This 1-year extended pe-established. • The Public Health Service. riod applies to claims for credit or refund filed
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any• The Foreign Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any tax year that began more than 5 years before the
amounts you receive from the plan for personal date of the determination.Conditions for exclusion. Do not includeinjury or sickness as income on your tax return. the disability payments in your income if any ofIf your plan reimbursed you for medical ex- Example. You retired in 2003 and receive athe following conditions apply.penses you deducted in an earlier year, you may pension based on your years of service. On
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse- 1. You were entitled to receive a disability August 6, 2009, you receive a determination of
ment in your income. See Recoveries under payment before September 25, 1975. service-connected disability retroactive to 2003.
Miscellaneous Income, later. Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxes2. You were a member of a listed govern- paid on your pension for 2006, 2007, and 2008.Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered ment service or its reserve component, or However, under the special limitation period,by an accident or health insurance plan through were under a binding written commitment you can also file a claim for 2005 as long as youa cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur- to become a member, on September 24, file the claim by August 6, 2010. You cannot fileance premiums was not included in your in- 1975. a claim for 2003 and 2004 because those taxcome, you are not considered to have paid the 3. You receive the disability payments for a years began more than 5 years before the deter-premiums and you must include any benefits combat-related injury. This is a personal mination.you receive in your income. If the amount of the injury or sickness that:premiums was included in your income, you are Terrorist attack or military action. Do notconsidered to have paid the premiums and any a. Results directly from armed conflict, include in your income disability payments youbenefits you receive are not taxable. receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-b. Takes place while you are engaged in rorist or military action.extra-hazardous service,Disability Pensions A terrorist action is one that is directed
c. Takes place under conditions simulat- against the United States or any of its alliesIf you retired on disability, you must include in ing war, including training exercises (including a multinational force in which theincome any disability pension you receive under such as maneuvers, or United States is participating). A military actiona plan that is paid for by your employer. You is one that involves the armed forces of thed. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.must report your taxable disability payments as United States and is a result of actual orwages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A threatened violence or aggression against the4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- United States or any of its allies, but does notcompensation from the Department of Vet-mum retirement age generally is the age at include training exercises.erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-which you can first receive a pension or annuity
tion for it. Your exclusion under thisif you are not disabled. Long-Term Carecondition is equal to the amount you would
You may be entitled to a tax credit if be entitled to receive from the VA. Insurance Contractsyou were permanently and totally dis-
abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP Pension based on years of service. If you Long-term care insurance contracts generally
tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for receive a disability pension based on years of are treated as accident and health insurance
the Elderly or the Disabled. service, you generally must include it in your contracts. Amounts you receive from them
Beginning on the day after you reach mini- income. However, if the pension qualifies for the (other than policyholder dividends or premium
mum retirement age, payments you receive are exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- refunds) generally are excludable from income
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the cussed earlier), do not include in income the part as amounts received for personal injury or sick-
payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or of your pension that you would have received if ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made
Publication 525 (2009) Page 17

Page 18 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on a per diem or other periodic basis under a • The cost of qualified long-term care serv- for this coverage and are treated as having paid
ices during the period. the full premium. You are an assistance eligiblelong-term care insurance contract, you must file
individual if:Form 8853 with your return. • The dollar amount for the period ($280 per
A long-term care insurance contract is an day for any period in 2009). • You are a qualified beneficiary as the re-
insurance contract that only provides coverage sult of an involuntary termination that oc-See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructionsfor qualified long-term care services. The con- curred during the period beginning onfor more information.tract must: September 1, 2008, and ending on De-
cember 31, 2009,• Be guaranteed renewable, Workers' Compensation • You are eligible for COBRA continuation• Not provide for a cash surrender value or
health coverage at any time during thatAmounts you receive as workers' compensationother money that can be paid, assigned,
period, andfor an occupational sickness or injury are fullypledged, or borrowed,
exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers' • You elect the coverage.• Provide that refunds, other than refunds compensation act or a statute in the nature of aon the death of the insured or complete workers' compensation act. The exemption also A qualified beneficiary is generally any individ-surrender or cancellation of the contract, applies to your survivors. The exemption, how- ual who is covered under a group health plan onand dividends under the contract may be ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits the day before the involuntary termination. Thisused only to reduce future premiums or you receive based on your age, length of serv- includes the covered employee, the employee'sincrease future benefits, and ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you spouse, and the employee's dependent.retired because of an occupational sickness or• Generally not pay or reimburse expenses The premium assistance (the 65% reductioninjury.incurred for services or items that would of the premium) applies to the first period of
be reimbursed under Medicare, except coverage beginning after February 16, 2009.If part of your workers' compensation
where Medicare is a secondary payer or The reduction applies until the earliest of:reduces your social security or
the contract makes per diem or other peri- equivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
! • The first date the assistance eligible indi-odic payments without regard to ex- received, that part is considered social security vidual becomes eligible for other grouppenses. (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and health plan coverage or Medicare cover-may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability age,of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-Qualified long-term care services. Qualified
• The date that is 9 months after the firstcellaneous Income, later.long-term care services are:
day of the first month for which the re-
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- Return to work. If you return to work after duced premium applies to the individual,
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili- qualifying for workers' compensation, salary or
tative services, and maintenance and payments you receive for performing light duties • The date the individual ceases to be eligi-personal care services, and are taxable as wages. ble for COBRA continuation coverage.
• Required by a chronically ill individual and Disability pension. If your disability pension
provided pursuant to a plan of care pre- is paid under a statute that provides benefits The premium assistance is not included in
scribed by a licensed health care practi- only to employees with service-connected disa- your gross income. However, if your modified
tioner. bilities, part of it may be workers' compensation. adjusted gross income (AGI) is more than
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of your $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly) but
pension, based on years of service, is taxable as not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if marriedChronically ill individual. A chronically ill in-
pension or annuity income. If you die, the part of filing jointly), your income tax for the tax year isdividual is one who has been certified by a
your survivors' benefit that is a continuation of increased by a percentage of the premium as-licensed health care practitioner within the previ-
the workers' compensation is exempt from tax. sistance. Your modified AGI is your AGI on Formous 12 months as one of the following.
1040, line 38 or Form 1040NR, line 35 plus any
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is foreign earned income exclusion, foreign hous-Other Sicknessunable to perform at least two activities of ing exclusion, foreign housing deduction, andand Injury Benefitsdaily living without substantial assistance exclusion of income for bona fide residents of
due to a loss of functional capacity. Activi- American Samoa and Puerto Rico. The percent-In addition to disability pensions and annuities,ties of daily living are eating, toileting, age that increases your tax is determined byyou may receive other payments for sickness ortransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- dividing the excess modified AGI (amount overinjury.nence. $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly)) by
Railroad sick pay. Payments you receive as $20,000 ($40,000 if married filing jointly). If your• An individual who requires substantial su- sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In- modified AGI is more than $145,000 ($290,000pervision to be protected from threats to surance Act are taxable and you must include if married filing jointly), your income tax for thehealth and safety due to severe cognitive them in your income. However, do not include tax year is increased by the premium assis-impairment. them in your income if they are for an on-the-job tance. Include the increase in your income tax
injury. on Form 1040, line 60 or Form 1040NR, line 57.
Limit on exclusion. The exclusion for pay- On the dotted line next to that line, enter theBlack lung benefit payments. These pay-ments made on a per diem  or other periodic amount of the tax and identify it as ªCOBRA.ºments are similar to workers' compensation andbasis under a long-term care insurance contract You may elect to permanently waive the rightgenerally are not taxable.is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total to the premium assistance. You will not receive
of these payments and any accelerated death COBRA premium assistance. The Consoli- the premium assistance and you will not have to
benefits made on a per diem or other periodic dated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of include the assistance in your income tax if your
basis under a life insurance contract because 1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were cov- modified AGI is more than $125,000 ($250,000
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa- ered under a group health plan and you would if married filing jointly). To make this election,
tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In- lose coverage because of a qualifying event, give a signed and dated notification (include a
surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous you should be allowed an opportunity to elect reference to ªpermanent waiverº) to the person
Income, later.) COBRA continuation health coverage under the to whom premiums are payable.
Under this limit, the excludable amount for plan. If there was no available election, your For more information see Notice 2009-27
any period is figured by subtracting any reim- employer or the plan was subject to an excise available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-16_irb/ar09.
bursement received (through insurance or oth- tax. You can be required to pay the full premium html.
erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care for the COBRA continuation coverage.
services during the period from the larger of the If you are an assistance eligible individual, Federal Employees' Compensation Act
following amounts. you pay 35% of the premium otherwise payable (FECA). Payments received under this Act for
Page 18 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 19 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
personal injury or sickness, including payments Amounts you receive under a reimburse- members of the barter club. The club subtracts
ment plan that provides for the payment of un- credit units from your account when you receiveto beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.
used reimbursement amounts in cash or other goods or services from other members. YouHowever, you are taxed on amounts you receive
benefits are included in your income. However, must include in your income the value of theunder this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45
a qualified HSA distribution from a health flexible credit units that are added to your account, evendays while a claim is being decided. Report this
spending account or health reimbursement ac- though you may not actually receive goods orincome on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or
count can be made to a health savings account. services from other members until a later taxon line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick
For details, see Publication 969. year.leave while a claim is being processed is taxable
 Reimbursements received under your em-and must be included in your income as wages.
Example 4. You own a small apartmentployer's plan of the amount paid for nonprescrip-
If part of the payments you receive building. In return for 6 months rent-free use oftion medicines and drugs (such as allergy
under FECA reduces your social se- an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artmedicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are
curity or equivalent railroad retirement she created. You must report as rental income
CAUTION
!not included in income. However, reimburse-
benefits received, that part is considered social on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market valuements of the amount paid for dietary supple-
security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene- of the artwork, and the artist must report asments (such as vitamins) that are merely
fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formbeneficial to your general health are included in
taxability of these benefits, see  Other Income 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.income.
under Miscellaneous Income, later.
Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If youYou can deduct the amount you spend to buy exchanged property or services through a barterback sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from BrokerMiscellaneous Incomefor nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similara miscellaneous deduction subject to the statement from the barter exchange should beThis section discusses various types of income.2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If sent to you by February 16, 2010. It should showYou may have taxable income from certainyou buy back sick leave in the same year you the value of cash, property, services, credits, ortransactions even if no money changes hands.used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick scrip you received from exchanges during 2009.For example, you may have taxable income ifleave pay. Do not deduct it separately. The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.you lend money at a below-market interest rate
or have a debt you owe canceled. Backup withholding. The income you re-Other compensation. Many other amounts
ceive from bartering generally is not subject toyou receive as compensation for sickness or
regular income tax withholding. However,Barteringinjury are not taxable. These include the follow-
backup withholding will apply in certain circum-ing amounts. Bartering is an exchange of property or services. stances to ensure that income tax is collected on
• Compensatory damages you receive for You must include in your income, at the time this income.
physical injury or physical sickness, received, the fair market value of property or Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic services you receive in bartering. If you ex- change must withhold, as income tax, 28% of
payments. See Court awards and dam- change services with another person and you the income if:
ages under Other Income, later. both have agreed ahead of time on the value of • You do not give the barter exchange yourthe services, that value will be accepted as fair• Benefits you receive under an accident or taxpayer identification number (generally amarket value unless the value can be shown tohealth insurance policy on which either social security number or an employerbe otherwise.you paid the premiums or your employer identification number), or Generally, you report this income on Sched-paid the premiums but you had to include ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However, • The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatthem in your income. if the barter involves an exchange of something you gave it an incorrect identification num-
other than services, such as in Example 4 be- ber. • Disability benefits you receive for loss of
low, you may have to use another form or sched-income or earning capacity as a result of If you join a barter exchange, you must certifyule instead.injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- under penalties of perjury that your taxpayericy. identification number is correct and that you areExample 1. You are a self-employed attor- not subject to backup withholding. If you do not• Compensation you receive for permanent ney who performs legal services for a client, a make this certification, backup withholding mayloss or loss of use of a part or function of small corporation. The corporation gives you begin immediately. The barter exchange willyour body, or for your permanent disfig- shares of its stock as payment for your services. give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayerurement. This compensation must be You must include the fair market value of the Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-based only on the injury and not on the shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- ilar form, for you to make this certification. Theperiod of your absence from work. These ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive barter exchange will withhold tax only up to thebenefits are not taxable even if your em- them. amount of any cash paid to you or deposited inployer pays for the accident and health
your account and any scrip or credit issued toplan that provides these benefits. Example 2. You are a self-employed ac- you (and converted to cash).countant. You and a house painter are members
of a barter club. Members get in touch with eachReimbursement for medical care. A reim- If tax is withheld from your barter in-other directly and bargain for the value of thebursement for medical care generally is not tax- come, the barter exchange will reportservices to be performed. In return for account-able. However, it may reduce your medical the amount of tax withheld on Form
TIPing services you provided, the house painterexpense deduction. If you receive reimburse- 1099-B, or similar statement.painted your home. You must report as yourment for an expense you deducted in an earlier income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formyear, see Recoveries, later. 1040) the fair market value of the house painting Canceled DebtsIf you receive an ªadvance reimbursementº services you received. The house painter mustor ªloanº for future medical expenses from your Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled orinclude in income the fair market value of theemployer without regard to whether you suffered forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youaccounting services you provided.a personal injury or sickness or incurred medical must include the canceled amount in your in-
expenses, that amount is included in your in- Example 3. You are self-employed and a come. You have no income from the canceled
come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi- member of a barter club. The club uses credit debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
cal expenses during the year. units as a means of exchange. It adds credit includes any indebtedness for which you are
Reimbursements received under your em- units to your account for goods or services you liable or which attaches to property you hold.
ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the provide to members, which you can use to If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
plan was established are included in income. purchase goods or services offered by other canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a
Publication 525 (2009) Page 19

Page 20 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business debt, report the amount on Schedule C If you are a stockholder in a corporation and institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-
or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedule you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- zation under its program designed as described
F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if tion, you generally do not realize income. This is in (3)(b) earlier.
the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer). because the canceled debt is considered as a An educational institution is an organization
contribution to the capital of the corporation with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-If the debt is a business debt, you may be
equal to the amount of debt principal that you larly enrolled body of students in attendance atable to elect to recognize the canceled debt in
canceled. the place where the educational activities areincome over a 5 tax year period. For information
carried on.on this election, see Revenue Procedure Repayment of canceled debt. If you included A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-2009-37 available at www.irs.gov/irb/ a canceled amount in your income and later pay poration, community chest, fund, or foundation2009-36_irb/ar01.html. the debt, you may be able to file a claim for organized and operated exclusively for one orrefund for the year the amount was included in more of the following purposes.Form 1099-C. If a Federal Government income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if
agency, financial institution, or credit union the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still • Charitable.
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or open. The statute of limitations generally does • Educational.more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella- not end until 3 years after the due date of your
tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is original return. • Fostering national or international amateur
shown in box 2. sports competition (but only if none of the
organization's activities involve providingInterest included in canceled debt. If any
Exceptions athletic facilities or equipment).interest is forgiven and included in the amount of
canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest • Literary.There are several exceptions to the inclusion ofalso will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you canceled debt in income. These are explained • Preventing cruelty to children or animals.must include the interest portion of the canceled next.debt in your income depends on whether the • Religious.Debt canceled as a result of a Midwesterninterest would be deductible if you paid it. See
• Scientific.disaster. If you qualify, you can exclude fromDeductible debt under Exceptions, later.
income the amount of a canceled nonbusinessIf the interest would not be deductible (such • Testing for public safety.debt. The debt must have been canceled by anas interest on a personal loan), include in your
applicable entity after the applicable disasterincome the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If Exception. You do have income if your stu-date and before January 1, 2010.the interest would be deductible (such as on a dent loan was made by an educational institu-You may qualify for this relief if your mainbusiness loan), include in your income the net tion and is canceled because of services youhome on the applicable disaster date was lo-amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown performed for the institution or other organiza-cated in a Midwestern disaster area. This exclu-in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box tion that provided the funds.sion does not apply to a canceled debt to the3). Education loan repayment assistance.extent that real property, which was security for
Education loan repayments made to you by thethe debt, is located outside a Midwestern disas-Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial National Health Service Corps Loan Repaymentter area. For more information, see Publicationinstitution offers a discount for the early payment Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or4492-B.of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis- a state education loan repayment program eligi-count is canceled debt. You must include the Student loans. Certain student loans contain ble for funds under the Public Health Service Actcanceled amount in your income. a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to are not taxable if you agree to provide primary
attend the qualified educational institution will be health services in health professional shortageMortgage relief upon sale or other disposi- canceled if you work for a certain period of time areas.tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage in certain professions for any of a broad class of
(recourse debt), and you are relieved of the Deductible debt. You do not have incomeemployers.
mortgage when you dispose of the property, you from the cancellation of a debt if your payment ofYou do not have income if your student loan
may realize gain or loss up to the fair market the debt would be deductible. This exceptionis canceled after you agreed to this provision
value of the property. To the extent the mort- applies only if you use the cash method of ac-and then performed the services required. To
gage discharge exceeds the fair market value of counting. For more information, see chapter 5 ofqualify, the loan must have been made by:
the property, it is income from discharge of in- Publication 334.
1. The Federal Government, a state or localdebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion Price reduced after purchase. Generally, ifgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,under Excluded debt, later. Report any income the seller reduces the amount of debt you oweor subdivision thereof,from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness for property you purchased, you do not havedebt that does not qualify for exclusion as other 2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation income from the reduction. The reduction of theincome on Form 1040, line 21. that has assumed control of a state, debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment
county, or municipal hospital, and whoseYou may be able to exclude part of the and reduces your basis in the property.
employees are considered public employ-mortgage relief on your principal resi- Excluded debt. Do not include a canceledees under state law, ordence. See Excluded debt, later.
TIP debt in your gross income in the following situa-
3. An educational institution: If you are not personally liable for a mort- tions.
gage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved
a. Under an agreement with an entity de- • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy caseof the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the under Title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub-erty (such as through foreclosure or reposses-
funds to the institution to make the loan, lication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. sion), that relief is included in the amount you
orrealize. You may have a taxable gain if the • The debt is canceled when you are insol-
amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basis b. As part of a program of the institution vent. However, you cannot exclude any
in the property. Report any gain on nonbusiness designed to encourage students to amount of canceled debt that is more than
property as a capital gain. serve in occupations or areas with un- the amount by which you are insolvent.
See Publication 4681 for more information. met needs and under which the serv- See Publication 908.
ices provided are for or under the • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in direction of a governmental unit or a celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3a corporation and the corporation cancels or tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a tion (defined later).
constructive distribution that is generally divi- • The debt is qualified real property busi-
dend income to you. For more information, see A loan to refinance a qualified student loan ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication
Publication 542, Corporations. also will qualify if it was made by an educational 334.
Page 20 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 21 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cancellation is intended as a gift. other than at regular intervals, include in your Interest option on insurance. If an insurance
company pays you interest only on proceedsincome only the benefits that are more than the• The debt is qualified principal residence from life insurance left on deposit, the interestamount payable to you at the time of the insuredindebtedness, discussed next. you are paid is taxable.person's death. If the benefit payable at death is
If your spouse died before October 23, 1986,not specified, you include in your income theQualified principal residence indebted- and you chose to receive only the interest frombenefit payments that are more than the presentness (QPRI). This is a mortgage secured by your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestvalue of the payments at the time of death.your principal residence that you took out to buy, exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.build, or substantially improve your principal res- If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromProceeds received in installments. If you re-idence. QPRI cannot be more than the cost of the policy in installments, you can take the inter-ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,your principal residence plus improvements. est exclusion from the time you begin to receiveyou can exclude part of each installment fromYou must reduce the basis of your principal the installments.your income.residence by the amount excluded from gross
To determine the excluded part, divide theincome. To claim the exclusion, you must file Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-amount held by the insurance company (gener-Form 982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustDischarge of Indebtedness (and Section 1082 ally the total lump sum payable at the death of include in income any proceeds that are moreBasis Adjustment), with your tax return. the insured person) by the number of install- than the cost of the life insurance policy. In
ments to be paid. Include anything over this general, your cost (or investment in the contract)Principal residence. Your principal resi- excluded part in your income as interest. is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifedence is the home where you ordinarily live most
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,of the time. You can have only one principal Example. The face amount of the policy is rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereresidence at any one time. $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re- not included in your income.Amount eligible for exclusion. The maxi- ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. You should receive a Form 1099-R showingmum amount you can treat as QPRI is $2 million The excluded part of each installment is $625 the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report($1 million if married filing separately). You can- ($75,000 ÷  120), or $7,500 for an entire year. these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formnot exclude debt canceled because of services The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or 1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.performed for the lender or on account of any $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to
For information on when the proceedsother factor not directly related to a decline in the you. are excluded from income, see Accel-value of your residence or to your financial con- Installments for life. If, as the beneficiary erated Death Benefits, later.dition.
TIP
under an insurance contract, you are entitled to
Limitation. If only part of a loan is QPRI, the receive the proceeds in installments for the rest Split-dollar life insurance. Generally, aexclusion applies only to the extent the canceled of your life without a refund or period-certain split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-amount is more than the amount of the loan guarantee, you figure the excluded part of each rangement between an owner and a non-ownerimmediately before the cancellation that is not installment by dividing the amount held by the of a life insurance contract under which eitherQPRI. insurance company by your life expectancy. If party to the arrangement pays all or part of thethere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the premiums, and one of the parties paying theExample. Your principal residence is se- amount held by the insurance company for this premiums is entitled to recover all or part ofcured by a debt of $1 million, of which $800,000 purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the those premiums from the proceeds of the con-is QPRI. Your residence is sold for $700,000 guarantee. tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesand $300,000 of debt is canceled. Only
to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.Surviving spouse. If your spouse died$100,000 of the canceled debt may be excluded
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-from income (the $300,000 that was discharged 1. Under the economic benefit regime, theceeds paid to you because of the death of yourminus the $200,000 of nonqualified debt). owner of the life insurance contract isspouse are received in installments, you can treated as providing current life insuranceexclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-Host or Hostess protection and other taxable economiccluded in the installments. If you remarry, you benefits to the non-owner of the contract.can continue to take the exclusion.If you host a party or event at which sales are
2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofmade, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving
the life insurance contract is treated asthe event is a payment for helping a direct seller Employer-owned life insurance contract. If
loaning premium payments to the owner ofmake sales. You must report this item as income you are the policyholder of an employer-owned
the contract.at its fair market value. life insurance contract, you must include in in-
Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- come any life insurance proceeds received that Only one of these regimes applies to any one
ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment are more than the premiums and any other policy. For more information, see sections
expenses. These expenses are deductible as amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject 1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to to this rule if you have a trade or business, you
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), own a life insurance contract on the life of your
but only up to the amount of income you receive employee, and you (or a related person) are a Endowment Contract Proceeds
for giving the party. beneficiary under the contract.
An endowment contract is a policy under whichFor more information about the 50% limit for However, you may exclude the full amount of you are paid a specified amount of money on ameal and entertainment expenses, see 50% the life insurance proceeds if the following apply. certain date unless you die before that date, inLimit in Publication 463.
which case, the money is paid to your desig-1. Before the policy is issued, you provide
nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inwritten notice about the insurance to theLife Insurance Proceeds
a lump-sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifemployee and the employee provides writ-
the proceeds are more than the cost of theLife insurance proceeds paid to you because of ten consent to be insured.
policy. To determine your cost, subtract anythe death of the insured person are not taxable 2. Either: amount that you previously received under theunless the policy was turned over to you for a
contract and excluded from your income fromprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid a. The employee was your employee the total premiums (or other consideration) paidunder an accident or health insurance policy or within the 12-month period before for the contract. Include the part of the lump-suman endowment contract. However, interest in- death, or, at the time the contract was payment that is more than your cost in yourcome received as a result of life insurance pro- issued, was a director or highly com- income.ceeds may be taxable. pensated employee, or Endowment proceeds that you choose to
b. The amount is paid to the family or des-Proceeds not received in installments. If receive in installments instead of a lump-sum
ignated beneficiary of the employee.death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed
Publication 525 (2009) Page 21

Page 22 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as an annuity. This is explained in Publication most common recoveries are refunds, reim- If you claimed them as part of your standard
bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc- deduction, the deduction is limited to the lesser575. For this treatment to apply, you must
tions. You also may have recoveries of of:choose to receive the proceeds in installments
non-itemized deductions (such as payments onbefore receiving any part of the lump sum. This • The amount allowable as a deduction ifpreviously deducted bad debts) and recoverieselection must be made within 60 days after the you itemized your deductions, orof items for which you previously claimed a taxlump-sum payment first becomes payable to
• $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly).credit.you.
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery If you claimed $500 ($1,000 if married filingin your income in the year you receive it up to the jointly) as part of your standard deduction andAccelerated Death Benefits amount by which the deduction or credit you you receive a real property tax refund in 2009,took for the recovered amount reduced your taxCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben- you would include in income only that part of thein the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-efits under a life insurance contract or viatical refund that reduced your real property tax belowcrease to an amount carried over to the currentsettlement before the insured's death are ex- $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly).year that resulted from the deduction or credit iscluded from income if the insured is terminally or Example. You are single and claim theconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-chronically ill. standard deduction for 2008. You paid real prop-lier year.
erty taxes of $800 in 2008. As part of yourViatical settlement. This is the sale or assign- Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed- standard deduction, you claimed $500 for yourment of any part of the death benefit under a life eral income taxes are not included in your in- real property taxes. In 2009, you receive a $400insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- come because they are never allowed as a refund of real property tax. The maximum refundvider. A viatical settlement provider is a person deduction from income. that you may have to include in income is $100.who regularly engages in the business of buying
State tax refund. If you received a state oror taking assignment of life insurance contracts Net disaster loss. For 2008, you could claim
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) inon the lives of insured individuals who are termi- a net disaster loss as part of your itemized de-
2009, you generally must include it in income ifnally or chronically ill and who meets the require- ductions or your standard deduction. If you
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Thements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal claimed the loss as part of your itemized deduc-
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- tions, the recovery of the loss is subject to theRevenue Code.
ernment Payments, to you by February 1, 2010. rules for Itemized Deduction Recoveries,  dis-
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form cussed later.Exclusion for terminal illness. Accelerated
1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the work- If you claimed them as part of your standarddeath benefits are fully excludable if the insured
sheet in the 2009 Form 1040 instructions for line deduction, any recovery of the net disaster lossis a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
10 to figure the amount (if any) to include in your is included in income. For information on nethas been certified by a physician as having an
income. See Itemized Deduction Recoveries, disaster losses, see Disaster Area Losses  inillness or physical condition that can reasonably
later, for when you must use Worksheet 2 on Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andbe expected to result in death within 24 months
page 25 of this publication. Thefts.from the date of the certification.
If you could choose to deduct for a tax year Mortgage interest refund. If you received aeither:Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured refund or credit in 2009 of mortgage interest paid
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally • State and local income taxes, or in an earlier year, the amount should be shown
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest• State and local general sales taxes, thenof costs incurred for qualified long-term care Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount
services are fully excludable. Accelerated death the maximum refund that you may have to in- from the interest you paid in 2009. You may
benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic clude in income is limited to the excess of the tax have to include it in your income under the rules
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit you chose to deduct for that year over the tax explained in the following discussions.
applies to the total of the accelerated death you did not choose to deduct for that year. Interest on recovery. Interest on any of thebenefits and any periodic payments received Example 1. For 2008 you can choose an amounts you recover must be reported as inter-from long-term care insurance contracts. For $11,000 state income tax deduction or a est income in the year received. For example,information on the limit and the definitions of $10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You report any interest you received on state or localchronically ill individual, qualified long-term care choose to deduct the state income tax. In 2009 income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a orservices, and long-term care insurance con- you receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. Form 1040NR, line 9a.tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- The maximum refund that you may have to in-tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits, Recovery and expense in same year. If theclude in income is $1,000, since you could haveearlier. refund or other recovery and the expense occurdeducted $10,000 in state general sales tax. in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
Example 2. For 2008 you can choose anException. The exclusion does not apply to duction or credit and is not reported as income.
$11,500 state general sales tax deductionany amount paid to a person (other than the Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receivebased on actual expenses or an $11,200 stateinsured) who has an insurable interest in the life a refund or other recovery that is for amountsincome tax deduction. You choose to deduct theof the insured because the insured: you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustgeneral sales tax deduction. In 2009 you return• Is a director, officer, or employee of the allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recoveredan item you had purchased and receive a $500person, or amount between the years in which you paid it.sales tax refund. In 2009 you also receive a
This allocation is necessary to determine the$1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum• Has a financial interest in the person's amount of recovery from any earlier years and torefund that you may have to include in income isbusiness. determine the amount, if any, of your allowable$500, since it is less than the excess of the tax
deduction for this item for the current year.deducted ($11,500) over the tax you did notForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- choose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = $9,700).ated death benefits made on a per diem or other Example. You paid 2008 estimated stateSince you did not choose to deduct the stateperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853 with income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.income tax, you do not include the state incomeyour return. You do not have to file Form 8853 to You made your fourth payment in January 2009.tax refund in income.exclude accelerated death benefits paid on the You had no state income tax withheld during
basis of actual expenses incurred. Real property tax. For 2008, you could claim 2008. In 2009, you received a $400 tax refund
your real property tax as part of your itemized based on your 2008 state income tax return. You
deductions or your standard deduction. If you claimed itemized deductions each year onRecoveries
claimed them as part of your itemized deduc- Schedule A (Form 1040).
A recovery is a return of an amount you de- tions, they are subject to the rules for Itemized You must allocate the $400 refund between
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The Deduction Recoveries, discussed later. 2008 and 2009, the years in which you paid the
Page 22 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 23 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75% the amount of tax shown on your 2008 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-
Form 1040, line 46. mum tax. (If you were subject to alternative($3,000 ÷  $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2008,
minimum tax, see Subject to alternativeso 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for 8. You could be claimed as a dependent by minimum tax, later.)amounts you paid in 2008 and is a recovery someone else in 2008.item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item, If any of the earlier statements is not true,9. You had to use the Itemized Deductionsyou will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, for see Total recovery not included in income, later.Worksheet in the 2008 Schedule A instruc-2009, and attach a copy of your computation
tions because your 2008 adjusted gross State tax refund. In addition to the previousshowing why that amount is less than the
income was over $159,950 ($79,975 if six items, you must include in your income theamount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-
married filing separately) and both of the full amount of a refund of state or local incomeceived from the state.
following apply. tax or general sales tax if the excess of the taxThe balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
you deducted over the tax you did not deduct isyour January 2009 estimated tax payment. a. You could not deduct all of the amount more than the refund of the tax deducted.When you figure your deduction for state and on the 2008 Itemized Deductions Work- If the refund is more than the excess, seelocal income taxes paid during 2009, you will sheet, line 1. Total recovery not included in income, later.reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your
b. The amount on line 8 of that 2008 work-deduction for state and local income taxes paid Where to report. Enter your state or local
sheet would be more than the amountduring 2009 will include the January net amount income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and
on line 4 of that worksheet if the amountof $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated the total of all other recoveries as other income
on line 4 were reduced by 80% of thestate income taxes paid in 2009 for 2009, and on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form
refund you received in 2009.any state income tax withheld during 2009. 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
If you file Form 1040NR, enter your state or
Deductions not itemized. If you did not item- local income tax refund on line 11 and the totalIf you also recovered an amount de-
ize deductions for the year for which you re- of all other recoveries on line 21. If you file Formducted as a non-itemized deduction,
ceived the recovery of an expense that was 1040NR-EZ, enter your state or local income taxfigure the amount of that recovery to
CAUTION
!
deductible only if you itemized, do not include refund on line 4.include in your income and add it to your ad-
any of the recovery amount in your income. justed gross income before applying the rules
Example. For 2008, you filed a joint returnexplained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction
on Form 1040. Your taxable income wasExample. You claimed the standard deduc- Recoveries, later.
$60,000 and you were not entitled to any taxtion on your 2008 federal income tax return. In
credits. Your standard deduction was $11,400,2009 you received a refund of your 2008 state Nonresident aliens. If you are a nonresident
and you had itemized deductions of $13,000. Inincome tax. Do not report any of the refund as alien and file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you
2009, you received the following recoveries forincome because you did not itemize deductions cannot claim the standard deduction. If you re-
amounts deducted on your 2008 return:for 2008. cover an itemized deduction that you claimed in
an earlier year, you generally must include the
Medical expenses ............. . $200full amount of the recovery in your income in the State and local income tax refund ... . 400Itemized Deduction Recoveries year you receive it. However, if you had no Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325taxable income in that earlier year (see NegativeThe following discussion explains how to deter- Total recoveries ............... . $925taxable income , later), you should completemine the amount to include in your income from Worksheet 2 to determine the amount you must None of the recoveries were more than thea recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier include in income. If any other statement under deductions taken for 2008. The difference be-year as an itemized deduction. However, you Total recovery included in income  is not true, tween the state and local income tax you de-generally do not need to use this discussion if see the discussion referenced in the statement ducted and your local general sales tax wasyou file Form 1040 and the recovery is for state to determine the amount to include in income. more than $400.or local income taxes paid in 2008. Instead, use Your total recoveries are less than thethe worksheet in the 2009 Form 1040 instruc- Total recovery included in income. If you amount by which your itemized deductions ex-tions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to recover any itemized deduction that you claimed ceeded the standard deduction ($13,000 −include in your income. in an earlier year, you generally must include the $11,400 = $1,600), so you must include yourYou cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet full amount of the recovery in your income in the total recoveries in your income for 2009. Reportand must use this discussion if you are a nonres- year you receive it. This rule applies if, for the the state and local income tax refund of $400 onident alien (discussed later) or any of the follow- earlier year, all of the following statements are Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of youring statements are true. true. recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
1. The recovery is for a tax year other than 1. Your itemized deductions exceeded the Total recovery not included in income. If2008. standard deduction by at least the amount one or more of the six statements listed in theof the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-2. The recovery is for a deducted item other preceding discussion is not true, you may betions did not exceed the standard deduc-than state or local income taxes, such as a able to exclude at least part of the recovery fromtion by at least the amount of the recovery,general sales tax or real property tax re- your income. See the discussion referenced tosee Standard deduction limit, later.)fund. in the statement. You may be able to use Work-
sheet 2 on page 25 to determine the part of your2. You had taxable income. (If you had no3. On your 2008 Form 1040, line 42 was recovery to include in your income. You also cantaxable income, see Negative taxable in-more than line 41. use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a statecome, later.)
4. You received a refund of state and local tax refund (discussed earlier) to include in in-3. Your deduction for the item recoveredincome taxes in 2009 that was more than come.equals or exceeds the amount recovered.the excess of your 2008 state and local Allocating the included part. If you are not(If your deduction was less than theincome tax deduction over the amount you required to include all of your recoveries in youramount recovered, see Recovery limited tocould have deducted for your 2008 state income, and you have both a state income taxdeduction, later.)and local general sales tax. refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,4. Your itemized deductions were not subject5. You made your last payment of 2008 state you must allocate the taxable recoveries be-to the limit on itemized deductions. (If youror local estimated tax in 2009. tween the state income tax refund you report ondeductions were limited, see Itemized de- Form 1040, line 10 (Form 1040NR, line 11), and6. You owed alternative minimum tax for ductions limited, later.) the amount you report as other income on Form2008. 5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you had 1040, line 21 (Form 1040NR, line 21). If you do
7. You could not deduct all your tax credits unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred- not use Worksheet 2, make the allocation as
for 2008 because their total was more than its, later.) follows.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 23

Page 24 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Divide your state income tax refund by the 2009 income. This is the smaller of your recov- • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
total of all your itemized deduction recov- eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your item- ceeded the base amount.
eries. ized deductions were more than the standard • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-deduction ($11,550 − $10,900 = $650).2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries tions other than medical and dental ex-
by the percentage in (1). This is the Negative taxable income. If your taxable in- penses, investment interest expense,
amount you report as a state income tax come for the prior year (Worksheet 2, line 10) nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,
refund. was a negative amount, the recovery you must and gambling losses.include in income is reduced by that amount.3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the In 2006 and 2007, your itemized deductionsYou have a negative taxable income for 2008 ifamount of taxable recoveries. This is the were reduced by only 2/3 of the smaller amount.your:amount you report as other income. In 2008 and 2009, your itemized deductions• Form 1040, line 42 was more than line 41, were reduced by only 1/3 of the smaller amount.
Example. In 2009 you recovered $2,500 of • Form 1040NR, line 39 was more than line If the amount you recovered was deducted inyour 2008 itemized deductions claimed on 38, or a year in which your itemized deductions wereSchedule A (Form 1040), but the recoveries you • Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than limited, you must include it in income up to themust include in your 2009 income are only line 12. difference between the amount of itemized de-$1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 was
ductions actually allowed that year and thedue to your state income tax refund. Your state
income tax was more than your state general Example. The facts are the same as in the amount you would have been allowed (the
sales tax by $600. The amount you report as a previous example except line 42 was $200 more greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-
state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is $300 than line 41 on your 2008 Form 1040 giving you dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-
[($500 ÷  $2,500) ×  $1,500]. The balance of the a negative taxable income of $200. You must tions using only the net amount of the recovery
taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported as other include $450 in your 2009 income, rather than item.
income on Form 1040, line 21. $650. To determine the part of the recovery you
Standard deduction limit. You generally are Recovery limited to deduction. You do not must include in income, follow the two steps
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do include in your income any amount of your re- below.
not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized covery that is more than the amount you de-
deductions that are more than your standard ducted in the earlier year. The amount you 1. Figure the greater of:
deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un- include in your income is limited to the smaller
a. The standard deduction for the earlierless you are required to itemize your deduc- of:
year, ortions). If your total deductions on the earlier year • The amount deducted, orreturn were not more than your income for that b. The amount of itemized deductions youyear, include in your income this year the lesser • The amount recovered. would have been allowed for the earlierof: year (after taking into account the limit
Example. During 2008, you paid $1,700 for• Your recoveries, or on itemized deductions) if you had fig-
medical expenses. From this amount you sub- ured them using only the net amount of• The amount by which your itemized de- tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted the recovery item. The net amount isductions exceeded the standard deduc- gross income. Your actual medical expense de- the amount you actually paid reducedtion. duction was $200. In 2009, you received a $500 by the recovery amount.reimbursement from your medical insurance forStandard deduction for earlier years. To Note. If you were required to itemize youryour 2008 expenses. The only amount of thedetermine if amounts recovered in 2009 must be deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)$500 reimbursement that must be included inincluded in your income, you must know the and not step 1(a).your income for 2009 is $200 Ðthe amount ac-standard deduction for your filing status for the tually deducted. 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from theyear the deduction was claimed. If you filed
Itemized deductions limited. You were sub-Form 1040, the standard deduction tables for amount of itemized deductions actually al-
ject to the limit on itemized deductions in the2008, 2007, and 2006 are shown in Tables 2, 3, lowed in the earlier year after applying the
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)and 4. If you need the standard deduction limit on itemized deductions.
was more than a base amount. This amountamounts for years before 2006, see the copy of The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-was:your return for that year. If you filed Form
ery to include in your income for the year you1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you could not claim the • For 2008, $159,950 ($79,975 if married receive the recovery. If your taxable income forstandard deduction.    filing separately), the earlier year was a negative amount, reduce
your recovery by the negative amount.Example. You filed a joint return on Form • For 2007, $156,400 ($78,200 if married
1040 for 2008 with taxable income of $45,000. filing separately), and If you had unused tax credits in the earlier
Your itemized deductions were $11,550. The year, see Unused tax credits, later.• For 2006, $150,500 ($75,250 if marriedstandard deduction that you could have claimed filing separately). For more information on this computation,was $10,900. In 2009, you recovered $2,100 of
see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inyour 2008 itemized deductions. None of the re- If the limit applied, your itemized deductions
Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.coveries were more than the actual deductions were reduced by the smaller of the following
for 2008. Include $650 of the recoveries in your amounts.
Page 24 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 25 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions Keep for Your Records
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your
2009 tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income
tax refund from 2008 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2007, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use
information from your tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the
deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits
and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that
was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 ...................................... . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ........................................................... . 3.
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2008, 
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 29
Form 1040NR, Schedule A, line 17
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 11 ................................... . 4.
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) ..................... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ................................... . 6.
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (If you filed Form 1040, the standard
deduction amounts for 2008, 2007, and 2006 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and
4. If you filed Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, enter -0-.) .............. . 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable ...................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 .............................................. . 9.
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (2008 Form 1040, line 43; 2008 Form
1040NR, line 40; 2008 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14) ................. . 10.
11. Amount to include in income for 2009:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero).4 .................................................. . 11.
If line 11 equals line 3Ð
Enter the amount from line 1 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11; Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
Enter the amount from line 2 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero Ð
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11;
 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage ........................................... . A.
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11 .................. . B.
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21 .................. . C.
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable
income. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses
(NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 25

Page 26 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2008 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1944, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1944, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1944  M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1944  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,450
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,900
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,000
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1944, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $900Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1944, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,450January 2, 1944 M Blind M • Married filing jointly Ð$10,900Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$8,000spouse's exemption January 2, 1944  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1944, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1944, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $  6,800
2 8,150 $1,350 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,950 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,000
deduction for 2008.dependent child 3 14,050
4 15,100 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,500
2 7,550 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,600 include in your income.
4 9,650
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,350 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,700
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2008 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by your real property tax (limited to $500 ($1,000 if
married filing jointly)) and net disaster loss that you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Page 26 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 27 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2007 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1943, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1943, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1943 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1943 M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,350
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,700
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,850
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1943, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1943, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,350January 2, 1943  M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,700Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,850spouse's exemption January 2, 1943  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
IF your AND the number on THEN your January 1, 1943, and not blind, stop here. This
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
is . . . line 7b.
b.If born before January 2, 1943, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,650
2 7,950 $1,300 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,750 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,800
deduction for 2007.dependent child 3 13,850
4 14,900 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,400
2 7,450 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,500 include in your income.
4 9,550
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,150 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 27

Page 28 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2006 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1942, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1942, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1942 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1942  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,150
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,300
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,550
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1942, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1942, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,150January 2, 1942 M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,300Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,550spouse's exemption January 2, 1942 M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked _____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1942, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1942, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,400
2 7,650 $1,250 ($1,000 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,300 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,300
deduction for 2006.dependent child 3 13,300
4 14,300 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,150
2 7,150 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,150 include in your income.
4 9,150
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 8,800 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,050
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
AGI for 2008 .............. . $1,159,950Example. Eileen Martin is single. She had in 2008, she derived a tax benefit of $4,333
State income taxes paid in 2008 . . $40,000an AGI of $1,159,950 and itemized her deduc- ($30,000 − $25,667). Therefore, only $4,333 of
3% reduction (amount on tions on Schedule A (Form 1040) for 2008. She the $5,000 refund is included in her income for2008 Itemized Deduction was not subject to alternative minimum tax and 2009.Worksheet, line 8) was not entitled to any credit against income  [($1,159,950 − $159,950) ×  3%] . . $30,000tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000 Unused tax credits. If you recover an item80% reduction (amount on 
of state income taxes. Her state general sales deducted in an earlier year in which you had2008 Itemized Deduction 
tax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only Worksheet, line 4) unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear-
($40,000 ×  80%) ........... . $32,000$30,000 of her state income taxes in 2008 lier year's tax to determine if you must include
Lesser of 3% reduction or because her otherwise allowable deductions of the recovery in your income. To do this, add the80% reduction ...... . $30,000$40,000 were reduced by $10,000. In 2009, amount of the recovery to your earlier year'sReduction limit (1/3) .......... . $10,000she received a $5,000 refund of her state in- taxable income and refigure the tax and the2008 deduction (amount on come taxes for 2008. credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-2008 Itemized Deduction The following shows how Eileen figured the computed tax, after application of the credits, isWorksheet, line 12)$10,000 reduction and other amounts from the more than the actual tax in the earlier year,($40,000 − $10,000) ........ . $30,000
Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2008 include the recovery in your income up to theRefund received in 2009 of 2008 
Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. These state income tax ........... . $ 5,000 amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in
Net amount of 2008 state incomeamounts are needed to figure the part of the the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase
tax ($40,000 − $5,000) ....... . $35,000$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her to a credit carried over to the current year that
income for 2009. resulted from deducting the recovered amountIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount
in the earlier year is considered to have re-of state income tax to figure her itemized de-
duced your tax in the earlier year. If the recov-ductions for 2008, the deduction allowed would
ery is for an itemized deduction claimed in ahave been $25,667 which is her otherwise al-
year in which the deductions were limited, seelowable deduction of $35,000 reduced by
Itemized deductions limited, earlier.$9,333. This is her 80% reduction ($35,000 ×
If your tax, after application of the credits,80% = $28,000) subject to the reduction limit
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit($28,000 ×  1/3 = $9,333). By deducting $30,000
Page 28 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 29 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery Unused tax credits. If you recover an item term public safety officer includes law enforce-
deducted in an earlier year in which you had ment officers, firefighters, chaplains, and res-in your income.
unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear- cue squad and ambulance crew members. For
Example. In 2008, Jean Black filed as lier year's tax to determine if you must include more information, see Publication 559.
head of household and itemized her deduc- the recovery in your income. To do this, add the
tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Her taxable amount of the recovery to your earlier year's Unemployment Benefits
income was $5,260 and her tax was $528. She taxable income and refigure the tax and the
claimed a child care credit of $1,200. The credit credits on the recomputed amount. If the re- The tax treatment of unemployment benefits
computed tax, after application of the credits, isreduced her tax to zero and she had an unused you receive depends on the type of program
more than the actual tax in the earlier year,tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 2009, paying the benefits.
include the recovery in your income up to theJean recovered $1,000 of her itemized deduc-
amount of the deduction that reduced the tax intions. She reduces her 2008 itemized deduc- Unemployment compensation. For 2009,
the earlier year. For this purpose, any increasetions by $1,000 and recomputes that year's tax you must include in income all unemployment
to a credit carried over to the current year thaton taxable income of $6,260. However, the compensation you received that is more than
resulted from deducting the recovered amountchild care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of $2,400. You should receive a Form 1099-G
in the earlier year is considered to have re-$628. Jean's tax liability for 2008 is not showing in box 1 the total unemployment com-
duced your tax in the earlier year.changed by reducing her deductions by the pensation paid to you in 2009. You must sub-
If your tax, after application of the credits,recovery. She did not have a tax benefit from tract $2,400 from that amount to figure how
does not change, you did not have a tax benefitthe recovered deduction and does not include much of your unemployment compensation is
from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryany of the recovery in her income for 2009. taxable and must be reported on line 19 of
in your income. Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of
Form 1040EZ. Do not enter less than zero. IfSubject to alternative minimum tax. If you
married filing jointly, include any unemploy-were subject to the alternative minimum tax in
Amounts Recovered for Credits ment compensation received by your spousethe year of the deduction, you will have to
that is more than $2,400.recompute your tax for the earlier year to deter- If you received a recovery in 2009 for an itemmine if the recovery must be included in your Types of unemployment compensation.for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlierincome. This will require a recomputation of Unemployment compensation generally in-year, you must increase your 2009 tax by theyour regular tax, as shown in the preceding cludes any amount received under an unem-amount of the recovery, up to the amount byexample, and a recomputation of your alterna- ployment compensation law of the Unitedwhich the credit reduced your tax in the earliertive minimum tax. If inclusion of the recovery States or of a state. It includes the followingyear. You had a recovery if there was a down-does not change your total tax, you do not benefits.ward price adjustment or similar adjustment oninclude the recovery in your income. However, the item for which you claimed a credit. • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofif your total tax increases by any amount, you This rule does not apply to the investment Columbia from the Federal Unemploy-received a tax benefit from the deduction and credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of ment Trust Fund.you must include the recovery in your income these credits are covered by other provisions ofup to the amount of the deduction that reduced • State unemployment insurance benefits.the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax
your tax in the earlier year. Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture • Railroad unemployment compensationof Investment Credit, for details. benefits.
Non-Itemized Deduction • Disability payments from a governmentSurvivor BenefitsRecoveries program paid as a substitute for unem-
ployment compensation. (Amounts re-Generally, payments made by or for an em-This section discusses recovery of deductions ceived as workers' compensation forployer because of an employee's death mustother than itemized deductions. injuries or illness are not unemploymentbe included in income. The following discus-
compensation. See Workers' Compensa-sions explain the tax treatment of certain pay-Total recovery included in income. If you tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,ments made to survivors. For additionalrecover an amount that you deducted in an earlier.) information, see Publication 559.earlier year in figuring your adjusted gross in-
• Trade readjustment allowances under thecome, you generally must include the full Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum pay- Trade Act of 1974.amount of the recovery in your income in the ments you receive from a decedent's employeryear received. • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-as the surviving spouse or beneficiary may be aster Relief and Emergency Assistanceaccrued salary payments; distributions fromTotal recovery not included in income. If Act of 1974.employee profit-sharing, pension, annuity, orany part of the deduction you took for the re- stock bonus plans; or other items that shouldcovered amount did not reduce your tax, you Governmental program. If you contributebe treated separately for tax purposes. The taxmay be able to exclude at least part of the to a governmental unemployment compensa-treatment of these lump-sum payments de-recovery from your income. You must include tion program and your contributions are notpends on the type of payment.the recovery in your income only up to the deductible, amounts you receive under the pro-
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax Salary or wages. Salary or wages re- gram are not included as unemployment com-
in the year of the deduction. (See Tax benefit ceived after the death of the employee are pensation until you recover your contributions.
rule, earlier.) usually ordinary income to you. If you deducted all of your contributions to the
program, the entire amount you receive underQualified employee retirement plans.Negative taxable income. If your taxable in- the program is included in your income.Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-come for the prior year was a negative amount, ployee retirement plans are subject to special Repayment of unemployment compensa-the recovery you must include in income is tax treatment. For information on these distri- tion. If you repaid in 2009 unemploymentreduced by that amount. You have a negative butions, see Publication 575 (or Publication compensation you received in 2009, subtracttaxable income for 2008 if your: 721, if you are the survivor of a federal em- the amount you repaid from the total amount
ployee or retiree).• Form 1040, line 42 was more than line you received and enter the difference on line 19
41, of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3
Public safety officer killed in the line of of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your• Form 1040NR, line 39 was more than duty. If you are a survivor of a public safety entry, enter ªRepaidº and the amount you re-line 38, or officer who was killed in the line of duty, you paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-
• Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than may be able to exclude from income certain tion in 2009 that you included in your income in
line 12. amounts you receive. For this purpose, the an earlier year, you can deduct the amount
Publication 525 (2009) Page 29

Page 30 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form of the grant in your taxable income. See Recov-
you itemize deductions. If the amount is more 1040EZ. eries, earlier. Unemployment assistance pay-
than $3,000, see Repayments, later. ments under the Act are taxableState employees. Payments similar to a unemployment compensation. See Unemploy-Tax withholding. You can choose to have state's unemployment compensation may be ment compensation under Unemploymentfederal income tax withheld from your unem- made by the state to its employees who are not Benefits, earlier.ployment compensation. To make this choice, covered by the state's unemployment compen-
complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding sation law. Although the payments are fully Disaster relief payments. You can exclude
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax taxable, do not report them as unemployment from income any amount you receive that is a
will be withheld at 10% of your payment. compensation. Report these payments on qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified
Form 1040, line 21. disaster relief payment is an amount paid toIf you do not choose to have tax with-
you: held from your unemployment com-
Welfare and Other pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
! 1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax, Public Assistance Benefits essary personal, family, living, or funeraleither through withholding or estimated tax, or expenses that result from a qualified dis-Do not include in your income governmentala combination of both, you may have to pay a aster;benefit payments from a public welfare fundpenalty. For more information, see Publication
based upon need, such as payments due to 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax.
blindness. Payments from a state fund for the essary expenses incurred for the repair or
Supplemental unemployment benefits. victims of crime should not be included in the rehabilitation of your home or repair or
Benefits received from an employer-financed victims' incomes if they are in the nature of replacement of its contents to the extent it
fund (to which the employees did not contrib- welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- is due to a qualified disaster;
ute) are not unemployment compensation. penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. 3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orThey are taxable as wages and are subject to You must include in your income any welfare sale of transportation as a common car-withholding for income tax. They may be sub- payments that are compensation for services rier because of the death or personalject to social security and Medicare taxes. For or that are obtained fraudulently. physical injuries incurred as a result of amore information, see Supplemental Unem- qualified disaster; orWork-training program. Payments you re-ployment Benefits in Publication 15-A, section
ceive from a state welfare agency for taking5, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. Re- 4. By a federal, state, or local government,part in a work-training program are not includedport these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 or or agency or instrumentality in connectionin your income, as long as the payments (ex-Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. with a qualified disaster in order to pro-clusive of extra allowances for transportation or mote the general welfare.Repayment of benefits. You may have to other costs) do not total more than the public
repay some of your supplemental unemploy- You can exclude this amount only to the extentwelfare benefits you would have received oth-
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-erwise. If the payments are more than the wel-
allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not ap-fare benefits you would have received, the
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in ply if you were a participant or conspirator in aentire amount must be included in your income
the same year you receive them, reduce the terrorist action or his or her representative.as wages.
total benefits by the amount you repay. If you A qualified disaster is:Alternative trade adjustment assistancerepay the benefits in a later year, you must (ATAA) payments. Payments you receive • A disaster which results from a terroristinclude the full amount of the benefits in your from a state agency under the Demonstration or military action;income for the year you received them. Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-Deduct the repayment in the later year as • A federally declared disaster; ortance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-an adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. cluded in your income. The state must send • A disaster which results from an accident(You cannot use Form 1040A or Form you Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount involving a common carrier, or from any1040EZ.) Include the repayment on Form you should include in income. The amount other event, which is determined to be1040, line 36, and enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and should be reported on Form 1040, line 21. catastrophic by the Secretary of the Trea-the amount on the dotted line next to line 36. If sury or his or her delegate.the amount you repay in a later year is more Persons with disabilities. If you have a dis-
than $3,000, you may be able to take a credit ability, you must include in income compensa- For amounts paid under item (4), a disasteragainst your tax for the later year instead of tion you receive for services you perform is qualified if it is determined by an applicablededucting the amount repaid. For information unless the compensation is otherwise ex- federal, state, or local authority to warrant as-on this, see Repayments, later. cluded. However, you do not include in income sistance from the federal, state, or local gov-the value of goods, services, and cash that youPrivate unemployment fund. Unemploy- ernment, agency, or instrumentality.receive, not in return for your services, but forment benefit payments from a private (nonun- Disaster mitigation payments. You alsoyour training and rehabilitation because youion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are can exclude from income any amount you re-have a disability. Excludable amounts includetaxable only if the amounts you receive are ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-payments for transportation and attendantmore than your total payments into the fund. ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments,care, such as interpreter services for the deaf,Report the taxable amount on Form 1040, line qualified disaster mitigation payments are alsoreader services for the blind, and services to21. most commonly paid to you in the period imme-help mentally retarded persons do their work.
diately following damage to property as a resultPayments by a union. Benefits paid to you Disaster relief grants. Do not include of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga-as an unemployed member of a union from post-disaster grants received under the Disas- tion payments are grants you use to mitigateregular union dues are included in your income ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in (reduce the severity of) potential damage fromon Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contrib- your income if the grant payments are made to future natural disasters. They are paid to youute to a special union fund and your payments help you meet necessary expenses or serious through state and local governments based onto the fund are not deductible, the unemploy- needs for medical, dental, housing, personal the provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disas-ment benefits you receive from the fund are property, transportation, or funeral expenses. ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or theincludible in your income only to the extent they Do not deduct casualty losses or medical ex- National Flood Insurance Act.are more than your contributions. penses that are specifically reimbursed by You cannot increase the basis or adjustedGuaranteed annual wage. Payments you these disaster relief grants. If you have de- basis of your property for improvements madereceive from your employer during periods of ducted a casualty loss for the loss of your with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.unemployment, under a union agreement that personal residence and you later receive a
guarantees you full pay during the year, are disaster relief grant for the loss of the same Home Affordable Modification Program
taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of residence, you may have to include part or all (HAMP). If you benefit from
Page 30 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 31 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pay-for-Performance Success Payments Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. De- Canceled sales contract. If you sell prop-
under HAMP, the payments are not taxable. ductions for expenses related to the activity are erty (such as land or a residence) under a
limited. They cannot total more than the in- contract, but the contract is canceled and youMortgage assistance payments. Payments come you report and can be taken only if you return the buyer's money in the same tax yearmade under section 235 of the National Hous- itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form as the original sale, you have no income froming Act for mortgage assistance are not in- 1040). See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 the sale. If the contract is canceled and youcluded in the homeowner's income. Interest of Publication 535 for information on whether return the buyer's money in a later tax year, youpaid for the homeowner under the mortgage an activity is considered carried on for a profit. must include your gain in your income for theassistance program cannot be deducted. year of the sale. When you return the money
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you and take back the property in the later year, youReplacement housing payments. Replace- received a payment from Alaska's mineral in- treat the transaction as a purchase that givesment housing payments made under the Uni- come fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), you a new basis in the property equal to theform Relocation Assistance and Real Property report it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line funds you return to the buyer.Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder- 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. Special rules apply to the reacquisition ofally Assisted Programs are not includible in The state of Alaska sends each recipient a real property where a secured indebtednessgross income, but are includible in the basis of document that shows the amount of the pay- (mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Forthe newly acquired property. ment with the check. The amount also is re- further information, see Repossession in Publi-Relocation payments and home rehabilita- ported to the IRS. cation 537, Installment Sales.tion grants. A relocation payment under sec-
Alimony. Include in your income on Formtion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community Car pools. Do not include in your income
1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to amounts you receive from the passengers for
ceive. Amounts you receive for child supporta displaced individual moving from a driving a car in a car pool to and from work.
are not income to you. For complete informa-flood-damaged residence to another residence These amounts are considered reimbursement
tion, see Publication 504, Divorced or Sepa-is not includible in gross income. Home rehabil- for your expenses. However, this rule does not
rated Individuals.itation grants received by low-income home- apply if you have developed car pool arrange-
owners in a defined area under the same act ments into a profit-making business of trans-Below-market loans. A below-market loanare also not includible in gross income. porting workers for hire.is a loan on which no interest is charged or on
Indian financing grants. Nonreimbursable which the interest is charged at a rate below the Cash for clunkers. If you received a vouchergrants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act applicable federal rate. If you make a be- to be applied toward the purchase of a qualifiedof 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In- low-market gift or demand loan, you must in- new vehicle in exchange for the trade-in of andian-owned economic enterprises on or near clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate) eligible used vehicle, the amount of thereservations are not includible in gross income. as interest income on your return. These loans voucher is not considered income. However,
are considered a transaction in which you, the your basis in the new vehicle must be reducedMedicare. Medicare benefits received under lender, are treated as having made: by the amount of the voucher.title XVIII of the Social Security Act are not
includible in the gross income of the individuals • A loan to the borrower in exchange for a
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receivefor whom they are paid. This includes basic note that requires the payment of interest
from a dealer or manufacturer of an item you(part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the at the applicable federal rate, and
buy is not income, but you must reduce yourAged)) and supplementary (part B (Supple- • An additional payment to the borrower, basis by the amount of the rebate.mentary Medical Insurance Benefits for the which the borrower transfers back to youAged)). as interest. Example. You buy a new car for $24,000
Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check fromDepending on the transaction, the additionalbenefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under the manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income topayment to the borrower is treated as a:section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is
are not includible in the gross income of the • Gift, the basis on which you figure gain or loss if you
individuals to whom they are paid. This applies sell the car and depreciation if you use it for• Dividend,to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance business.
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, • Contribution to capital,
widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, Casualty insurance and other reimburse-• Payment of compensation, oras well as the lump-sum death payment. ments. You generally should not report these
• Another type of payment. reimbursements on your return unless you areNutrition Program for the Elderly. Food figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro- The borrower may have to report this payment See Publication 547.gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you as income, depending on its classification.
prepare and serve free meals for the program, Charitable gift annuities. If you are the ben-For more information on below-marketinclude in your income as wages the cash pay eficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you mustloans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.you receive, even if you are also eligible for include the yearly annuity or fixed percentagefood benefits. Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in payment in your income.
your income. The payer will report the types of incomePayments to reduce cost of winter energy.
you received on Form 1099-R. Report thePayments made by a state to qualified people Campaign contributions. These contribu- gross distribution from box 1 on Form 1040,to reduce their cost of winter energy use are not tions are not income to a candidate unless they line 16a, or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and thetaxable. are diverted to his or her personal use. To be part taxed as ordinary income (box 2a minus
exempt from tax, the contributions must be box 3) on Form 1040, line 16b, or on FormOther Income spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund 1040A, line 12b. Report the portion taxed as
for use in future campaigns. However, interest capital gain (box 3) on Schedule D, line 8.The following brief discussions are arranged in earned on bank deposits, dividends receivedalphabetical order. Income items that are dis- on contributed securities, and net gains real- Child support payments. You should notcussed in greater detail in another publication ized on sales of contributed securities are tax- report these payments on your return. Seeinclude a reference to that publication. able and must be reported on Form 1120-POL, Publication 504 for more information.
Activity not for profit. You must include on U.S. Income Tax Return for Certain Political
your return income from an activity from which Organizations. Excess campaign funds trans- Court awards and damages. To determine
you do not expect to make a profit. An example ferred to an office account must be included in if settlement amounts you receive by compro-
of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you the officeholder's income on Form 1040, line mise or judgment must be included in your
operate mostly for recreation and pleasure. 21, in the year transferred. income, you must consider the item that the
Publication 525 (2009) Page 31

Page 32 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
settlement replaces. The character of the in- • The judgment or settlement to which your Trusts, and your share of the income is re-
come as ordinary income or capital gain de- attorney fees and court costs apply must ported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),
pends on the nature of the underlying claim. occur after October 22, 2004. Beneficiary's Share of Income, Deductions,
Include the following as ordinary income. Credits, etc.
Pre-existing agreement. If you receive Current income required to be distrib-1. Interest on any award. damages under a written binding agreement, uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate orcourt decree, or mediation award that was in2. Compensation for lost wages or lost prof- trust that must distribute all of its current in-effect (or issued on or before) September 13,its in most cases. come, you must report your share of the distrib-1995, do not include in income any of those utable net income, whether or not you actually3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does damages received on account of personal inju- received it.not matter if they relate to a physical in- ries or sickness.
jury or physical sickness. Current income not required to be distrib-
Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re- uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or4. Amounts received in settlement of pen- ceive benefits under a credit card disability or trust and the fiduciary has the choice ofsion rights (if you did not contribute to the unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are whether to distribute all or part of the currentplan). taxable to you. These plans make the minimum income, you must report:
monthly payment on your credit card account if5. Damages for: • All income that is required to be distrib-you cannot make the payment due to injury,
uted to you, whether or not it is actuallya. Patent or copyright infringement, illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on
distributed, plusForm 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youb. Breach of contract, or received during the year that is more than the • All other amounts actually paid or
amount of the premiums you paid during thec. Interference with business operations. credited to you,
year.
up to the amount of your share of distributable6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis- Down payment assistance. If you purchase net income.tress received to satisfy a claim under a home and receive assistance from a non- How to report. Treat each item of incomeTitle VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. profit corporation to make the down payment, the same way that the estate or trust wouldthat assistance is not included in your income.7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- treat it. For example, if a trust's dividend in-If the corporation qualifies as a tax-exemptgent fees) where the underlying recovery come is distributed to you, you report the distri-charitable organization, the assistance isis included in gross income. bution as dividend income on your return. Thetreated as a gift and is included in your basis of same rule applies to distributions of tax-exempt Do not include in your income compensa- the house. If the corporation does not qualify, interest and capital gains.tory damages for personal physical injury or the assistance is treated as a rebate or reduc- The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellphysical sickness (whether received in a lump tion of the purchase price and is not included in you the type of items making up your share ofsum or installments). your basis. the estate or trust income and any credits youEmotional distress. Emotional distress it- are allowed on your individual income tax re-Economic recovery payment. If you re-self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, turn.ceived an economic recovery payment, suchbut damages you receive for emotional distress as the payments of $250 made to certain recipi- Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gen-due to a physical injury or sickness are treated ents of social security, SSI, railroad retirement, erally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.as received for the physical injury or sickness. or certain veterans' benefits, it is not taxable forDo not include them in your income. Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantorfederal income tax purposes, but it reduces anyIf the emotional distress is due to a personal trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-making work pay credit or government retireeinjury that is not due to a physical injury or ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overcredit.sickness (for example, unlawful discrimination the trust. (The grantor is the one who trans-
or injury to reputation), you must include the Employment agency fees. If you get a job ferred property to the trust.) This rule applies if
damages in your income, except for any dam- through an employment agency, and the fee is the property (or income from the property) put
ages you receive for medical care due to that paid by your employer, the fee is not includible into the trust will or may revert (be returned) to
emotional distress. Emotional distress includes in your income if you are not liable for it. How- the grantor or the grantor's spouse.
physical symptoms that result from emotional ever, if you pay it and your employer reim- Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the
distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and burses you for it, it is includible in your income. grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at
stomach disorders. the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theEnergy conservation subsidies. You can value of the transferred property.Deduction for costs involved in unlawful exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-discrimination suits. You may be able to vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- Expenses paid by another. If your personaldeduct attorney fees and court costs paid to ties for the purchase or installation of an energy expenses are paid for by another person, suchrecover a judgment or settlement for a claim of conservation measure for a dwelling unit. as a corporation, the payment may be taxableunlawful discrimination under various provi- to you depending upon your relationship withEnergy conservation measure. This in-sions of federal, state, and local law listed in that person and the nature of the payment. Butcludes installations or modifications that areInternal Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim if the payment makes up for a loss caused byprimarily designed to reduce consumption ofagainst the United States government, or a that person, and only restores you to the posi-electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social tion you were in before the loss, the payment isagement of energy demand.Security Act. You can claim this deduction as not includible in your income.an adjustment to income on Form 1040, line Dwelling unit. This includes a house,
36. The following rules apply. Exxon Valdez settlement income. Includeapartment, condominium, mobile home, boat,
in your income on Form 1040, line 21, or Formor similar property. If a building or structure• The attorney fees and court costs may be 1040NR, line 21, any qualified settlement in-contains both dwelling and other units, anypaid by you or on your behalf in connec- come you receive as a qualified taxpayer. Seesubsidy must be properly allocated.tion with the claim for unlawful discrimi- Statement, later. Qualified settlement incomenation, the claim against the United Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, is any interest and punitive damage awardsStates government, or the claim under unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal that are:section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Se- income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estatecurity Act. • Otherwise includible in taxable income,or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its and• The deduction you are claiming cannot income distributed or required to be distributed
be more than the amount of the judgment to you. However, there is never a double tax. • Received in connection with the civil ac-
or settlement you are including in income Estates and trusts file their returns on Form tion In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV
for the tax year. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and (HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska).
Page 32 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 33 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You are a qualified taxpayer if you were a • A manager of a trade or business you A qualified foster individual is a person who:
operated before declaring Chapter 11plaintiff in the civil action mentioned earlier or
1. Is living in a foster family home, andbankruptcy,you were a beneficiary of the estate of your
spouse or a close relative who was such a 2. Was placed there by:• A notary public, orplaintiff and from whom you acquired the right
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-• An election precinct official.to receive qualified settlement income.
ical subdivisions, orThe income can be received as a lump sum
or as periodic payments. You will receive a b. A qualified foster care placementIf you are not an employee and the
Form 1099-MISC showing the gross amount of agency.fees for your services from the same
the settlement income paid to you in the tax payor total $600 or more for the year,
TIP
year. you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. Difficulty-of-care payments. These are
Contributions to eligible retirement plan. additional payments that are designated by theCorporate director. Corporate director
If you are a qualified taxpayer you can contrib- payer as compensation for providing the addi-fees are self-employment income. Report
ute all or part of your qualified settlement in- tional care that is required for physically, men-these payments on Schedule C or Schedule
tally, or emotionally handicapped qualifiedcome, up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement C-EZ (Form 1040).
foster individuals. A state must determine thatplan, including an IRA. Contributions to eligible
Personal representatives. All personal the additional compensation is needed, and theretirement plans, other than a Roth IRA or a representatives must include in their gross in- care for which the payments are made must bedesignated Roth contribution, reduce the quali- come fees paid to them from an estate. If you provided in your home.fied settlement income that you must include in are not in the trade or business of being an You must include in your income diffi-income. See Statement, later. For more infor- executor (for instance, you are the executor of culty-of-care payments received for more than:mation on these contributions, see Publica- a friend's or relative's estate), report these feestions 560, 575, and 590. • 10 qualified foster individuals under ageon Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or
19, orLegal expenses. You may be able to de- business of being an executor, report these
fees as self-employment income on Scheduleduct attorney fees and court costs paid in con- • 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or
C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee isnection with the civil action. Depending on the older.
not includible in income if it is waived.facts and circumstances, these expenses are
either claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040) or Maintaining space in home. If you areManager of trade or business for bank-
Form 1040NR (Schedule A), or deducted in paid to maintain space in your home for emer-ruptcy estate. Include in your income all
figuring the income you report on Form 1040, gency foster care, you must include the pay-payments received from your bankruptcy es-
line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21. If the quali- ment in your income.tate for managing or operating a trade or busi-
fied settlement income was received in con- ness that you operated before you filed for Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-nection with your trade or business (other than bankruptcy. Report this income on Form 1040, ceive payments that you must include in youras an employee), you can reduce the taxable line 21. income, you are in business as a foster-careamount of qualified settlement income by these provider and you are self-employed. Report theNotary public. Report payments for theseexpenses. In all other situations, you can only payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZservices on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZclaim these expenses as a miscellaneous item- (Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business(Form 1040). These payments are not subjectized deduction subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycareto self-employment tax. (See the separate in-gross-income limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), Providers), to help you determine the amountstructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) forline 23, or Form 1040NR (Schedule A), line 11. you can deduct for the use of your home.details.)For example, an employee or the surviving
Found property. If you find and keep prop-Election precinct official. You should re-spouse or beneficiary of a deceased plaintiff
erty that does not belong to you that has beenceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-would claim the expenses as a miscellaneous
lost or abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxableices performed as an election official oritemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. See
to you at its fair market value in the first year it iselection worker. Report these payments on lineStatement, next.
your undisputed possession.7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of
Statement. If you report on Form 1040, Form 1040EZ.
Free tour. If you received a free tour from aline 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21, qualified
Food program payments to daycare provid- travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,settlement income that is less than the gross
ers. If you operate a daycare service and you must include its value in your income. Re-amount shown on the Form 1099-MISC, you
receive payments under the Child and Adult port the fair market value of the tour on Formmust attach a statement to your tax return. The
Care Food Program administered by the De- 1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade orstatement must identify and show the gross
partment of Agriculture that are not for your business of organizing tours. You cannot de-amount of the qualified settlement income, the
services, the payments generally are not in- duct your expenses in serving as the voluntaryreductions for the amount contributed to an cluded in your income. However, you must leader of the group at the group's request. Ifeligible retirement plan or allowable as legal include in your income any part of the pay- you organize tours as a trade or business,expenses not reported as a miscellaneous ments you do not use to provide food to individ- report the tour's value on Schedule C or Sched-itemized deduction, and the net amount. uals eligible for help under the program. ule C-EZ (Form 1040).
Income averaging. For purposes of the
Foreign currency transactions. If you have Gambling winnings. You must include yourincome averaging rules that apply to an individ-
a gain on a personal foreign currency transac- gambling winnings in your income on Formual engaged in a farming or fishing business, tion because of changes in exchange rates, 1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions onqualified settlement income is treated as attrib- you do not have to include that gain in your Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-utable to a fishing business for the tax year in income unless it is more than $200. If the gain bling losses you had during the year, but onlywhich it is received. See Schedule J (Form is more than $200, report it as a capital gain. up to the amount of your winnings.1040) and its instructions for more information.
Foster care providers. Payments you re- Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lot-
Fees for services. Include all fees for your ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a teries and raffles are gambling winnings. In
services in your income. Examples of these qualified foster care placement agency for pro- addition to cash winnings, you must include in
fees are amounts you receive for services you viding care to qualified foster individuals in your your income the fair market value of bonds,
perform as: home generally are not included in your in- cars, houses, and other noncash prizes. How-
come. However, you must include in your in- ever, the difference between the fair market• A corporate director, come payments received for the care of more value and the cost of an oil and gas lease
• An executor, administrator, or personal than 5 individuals age 19 or older and certain obtained from the government through a lottery
representative of an estate, difficulty-of-care payments. is not includible in income.
Publication 525 (2009) Page 33

Page 34 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Installment payments. Generally, if you payments are made in property, your basis in more information on this exclusion, see Educa-
win a state lottery prize payable in installments, the property is its fair market value when you tion Savings Bond Program in chapter 1 of
you must include in your gross income the receive it. Publication 550.
annual payments and any amounts you receive Excludable restitution payments are pay- Interest on state and local government obli-designated as interest on the unpaid install- ments or distributions made by any country or gations. This interest is usually exempt fromments. If you sell future lottery payments for a any other entity because of persecution of an federal tax. However, you must show thelump sum, you must report the amount you individual on the basis of race, religion, physi- amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-receive from the sale as ordinary income (Form cal or mental disability, or sexual orientation by eral income tax return. For more information,1040, line 21) in the year you receive it. Nazi Germany, any other Axis regime, or any see State or Local Government Obligations inother Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, chapter 1 of Publication 550.Form W-2G. You may have received a whether the payments are made under a law orForm W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, as a result of a legal action. They include com- Job interview expenses. If a prospectiveshowing the amount of your gambling winnings pensation or reparation for property losses re- employer asks you to appear for an interviewand any tax taken out of them. Include the sulting from Nazi persecution, including and either pays you an allowance or reim-amount from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. proceeds under insurance policies issued burses you for your transportation and otherInclude the amount shown in box 2 on Form before and during World War II by European travel expenses, the amount you receive gen-1040, line 61, as federal income tax withheld. insurance companies. erally is not taxable. You include in income only
the amount you receive that is more than yourGifts and inheritances. Generally, property
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi- actual expenses.you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is
ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs,not included in your income. However, if prop- Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must bemust be included in your income on Form 1040,erty you receive this way later produces in- included in your income on Form 1040, line 21.line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZcome such as interest, dividends, or rents, that If you must give the pay to your employer(Form 1040) if from your self-employment ac-income is taxable to you. If property is given to because your employer continues to pay yourtivity.a trust and the income from it is paid, credited, salary while you serve on the jury, you canor distributed to you, that income is also taxable deduct the amount turned over to your em-Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofto you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the ployer as an adjustment to income. Enter thea qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsincome from the property, that income is tax- amount you repay your employer on Formsecured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofable to you. 1040, line 36. Enter ªJury Payº and the amountCongress as of March 17, 1988, do not include
on the dotted line next to line 36.Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited in your income amounts you receive from activ-
a pension or an individual retirement arrange- ities related to those fishing rights. The income Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks,ment (IRA), you may have to include part of the is not subject to income tax, self-employment side commissions, push money, or similar pay-inherited amount in your income. See Survi- tax, or employment taxes. ments you receive in your income on Formvors and Beneficiaries in Publication 575, if you 1040, line 21, or on Schedule C or ScheduleInterest on frozen deposits. In general, youinherited a pension. See What If You Inherit an C-EZ (Form 1040) if from yourexclude from your income the amount of inter-IRA? in Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA. self-employment activity.est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit isExpected inheritance. If you sell an inter- frozen if, at the end of the calendar year, you Example. You sell cars and help arrangeest in an expected inheritance from a living cannot withdraw any part of the deposit be- car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokersperson, include the entire amount you receive cause: pay back part of their commissions to you forin gross income on Form 1040, line 21.
• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- referring customers to them. You must includeBequest for services. If you receive cash solvent, or the kickbacks in your income.or other property as a bequest for services you
• The state where the institution is locatedperformed while the decedent was alive, the Manufacturer incentive payments. You
has placed limits on withdrawals becausevalue is taxable compensation. must include as other income on Form 1040,
other financial institutions in the state are line 21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (FormHistoric preservation grants. Do not in- bankrupt or insolvent. 1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-clude in your income any payment you receive ments from a manufacturer that you receive asunder the National Historic Preservation Act to Excludable amount. The amount of inter- a salesperson. This is true whether you receivepreserve a historically significant property. est you exclude from income for the year is the the payment directly from the manufacturer or
interest that was credited on the frozen deposit through your employer.Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not
for that tax year minus the sum of:deductible from other income. A hobby is an
Example. You sell cars for an automobileactivity from which you do not expect to make a 1. The net amount withdrawn from the de- dealership and receive incentive paymentsprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier, under posit during that year, and from the automobile manufacturer every timeOther Income.
you sell a particular model of car. You report2. The amount that could have been with-If you collect stamps, coins, or other the incentive payments on Form 1040, line 21.drawn at the end of that tax year (notitems as a hobby for recreation and reduced by any penalty for premature Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAspleasure, and you sell any of the
CAUTION
! withdrawals of a time deposit). and Medicare Advantage MSAs). You gen-items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.
erally do not include in income amounts youThe excluded part of the interest is included inHowever, if you sell items from your collection
withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicareyour income in the tax year it becomes with-at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay fordrawable.
qualified medical expenses. Generally, quali-Holocaust victims restitution. Restitution
fied medical expenses are those you can de-payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or Interest on qualified savings bonds. You
duct on Schedule A (Form 1040). For morethe heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest may be able to exclude from income the inter-
information about Archer MSAs or Medicareearned on the payments are not taxable. Ex- est from qualified U.S. savings bonds you re-
Advantage MSAs, see Publication 969.cludable interest is earned by escrow accounts deem if you pay qualified higher educational
or settlement funds established for holding expenses in the same year. Qualified higher Moving expense reimbursements. Youfunds prior to the settlement. You also do not educational expenses are those you pay for generally should not report these benefits oninclude the restitution payments and interest tuition and required fees at an eligible educa- your return. See Publication 521 for more infor-the funds earned prior to disbursement in any tional institution for you, your spouse, or your mation.computations in which you ordinarily would add dependent. A qualified U.S. savings bond is a
excludable income to your adjusted gross in- series EE bond issued after 1989 or a series I Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a
come, such as the computation to determine bond. The bond must have been issued to you lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz
the taxable part of social security benefits. If the when you were 24 years of age or older. For program, beauty contest, or other event, you
Page 34 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 35 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must include it in your income. For example, if of money) and then prepare the state- • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-
ment as described in (b). quired for courses at the educational in-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
stitution.you must report this income on Form 1040, line d. After the transfer, you should receive21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not from the payer a written response stat- Amounts used for room and board do not qual-include its value in your income. ing when and to whom the designated ify for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for
Prizes and awards in goods or services amounts were transferred. more information on qualified scholarships and
must be included in your income at their fair fellowship grants.
market value. These rules do not apply to scholarship or Payment for services. Generally, youfellowship awards. See Scholarships and fel-Employee awards or bonuses. Cash must include in income the part of any scholar-lowships, later.awards or bonuses given to you by your em- ship or fellowship that represents payment for
ployer for good work or suggestions generally past, present, or future teaching, research, orQualified tuition program (QTP). A quali-
must be included in your income as wages. other services. This applies even if all candi-fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-
However, certain noncash employee achieve- dates for a degree must perform the services togram) is a program set up to allow you to either
receive the degree.ment awards can be excluded from income. prepay or contribute to an account established
See Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous Do not include in income the part of anyfor paying a student's qualified higher educa-
Compensation, earlier. tion expenses at an eligible educational institu- scholarship or fellowship representing pay-
tion. A program can be established and ment for teaching, research, or other services ifPrize points. If you are a salesperson and maintained by a state, an agency or instrumen- you receive the amount under the Nationalreceive prize points redeemable for merchan- tality of a state, or an eligible educational insti- Health Service Corps Scholarship Program ordise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu- tution. the Armed Forces Health Professions Scholar-facturer to employees of dealers, you must The part of a distribution representing the ship and Financial Assistance program.include their fair market value in your income. amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not For information about the rules that apply toThe prize points are taxable in the year they are included in income. This is a return of the in- a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided topaid or made available to you, rather than in the vestment in the program. employees and their families by an educationalyear you redeem them for merchandise. The beneficiary generally does not include institution, see Publication 970.
in income any earnings distributed from a QTPPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-if the total distribution is less than or equal towere awarded a prize in recognition of accom- partment of Veterans Affairs are not included inadjusted qualified higher education expenses.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, your income. These allowances are not consid-See Publication 970 for more information.artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you ered scholarship or fellowship grants.generally must include the value of the prize in Railroad retirement annuities. The follow- Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a con-your income. However, you do not include this ing types of payments are treated as pension or test are not scholarships or fellowships if youprize in your income if you meet all of the annuity income and are taxable under the rules do not have to use the prizes for educationalfollowing requirements. explained in Publication 575. purposes. You must include these amounts in
1. You were selected without any action on • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are your income on Form 1040, line 21, whether or
your part to enter the contest or proceed- more than the social security equivalent not you use the amounts for educational pur-
benefit.ing. poses.
• Tier 2 benefits.2. You are not required to perform substan- Smallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eli-tial future services as a condition for re- gible individual who receives benefits under the• Vested dual benefits.ceiving the prize or award. Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act
of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a3. The prize or award is transferred by the Rewards. If you receive a reward for provid- covered countermeasure, you can exclude thepayer directly to a governmental unit or ing information, include it in your income. payment from your income (to the extent it istax-exempt charitable organization as
not allowed as a medical and dental expenseSale of home. You may be able to excludedesignated by you. The following condi-
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligi-from income all or part of any gain from the saletions apply to the transfer.
ble individuals include health care workers,or exchange of a personal residence. See Pub-
a. You cannot use the prize or award emergency personnel, and first responders in alication 523.
before it is transferred. smallpox emergency, who have received a
Sale of personal items. If you sold an item smallpox vaccination.b. You should provide the designation you owned for personal use, such as a car,before the prize or award is presented refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or Social security and equivalent railroad re-to prevent a disqualifying use. The silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital tirement benefits. Social security ordesignation should contain: gain. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-
You cannot deduct a loss. able, must be included in the income of thei. The purpose of the designation by However, if you sold an item you held for person who has the legal right to receive themaking a reference to section investment, such as gold or silver bullion, benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital able, and the amount that is taxable, dependsCode, gain and any loss is deductible as a capital on the amount of the benefits and your other
loss.ii. A description of the prize or award, income.
Social security benefits include any monthlyExample. You sold a painting on an onlineiii. The name and address of the or- benefit under Title II of the Social Security Actauction website for $100. You bought the paint-ganization to receive the prize or and any part of a tier I railroad retirement bene-ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportaward, fit treated as a social security benefit. Socialyour $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule Div. Your name, address, and taxpayer security benefits do not include any supple-(Form 1040).identification number, and mental security income (SSI) payments.
Scholarships and fellowships. A candidatev. Your signature and the date Form SSA-1099. If you received social se-for a degree can exclude amounts received assigned. curity benefits during the year, you will receivea qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-scholarship or fellowship is any amount youc. In the case of an unexpected presen- ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withreceive that is for:tation, you must return the prize or your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a
award before using it (or spending, de- worksheet you can use to figure whether any of• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an
your benefits are taxable.positing, investing it, etc., in the case educational institution, or
Publication 525 (2009) Page 35

Page 36 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For an explanation of the information found allowance for taking children to and from Type of deduction. The type of deduction
on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915. school if you are not in the business of taking you are allowed in the year of repayment de-
children to school. You cannot deduct ex- pends on the type of income you included in theForm RRB-1099. If you received penses for providing this transportation. earlier year. You generally deduct the repay-equivalent railroad retirement or special guar- ment on the same form or schedule on whichanty benefits during the year, you will receive Union benefits and dues. Amounts de- you previously reported it as income. For ex-Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad ducted from your pay for union dues, assess- ample, if you reported it as self-employmentRetirement Board. ments, contributions, or other payments to a income, deduct it as a business expense onFor an explanation of the information found union cannot be excluded from your income. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) oron your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915. You may be able to deduct some of these Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as aIf you received other railroad retirement payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub- capital gain, deduct it as a capital loss onbenefits, see Railroad retirement annuities, ject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it asearlier. your job and if you itemize deductions on wages, unemployment compensation, or otherSchedule A (Form 1040). For more informa-Joint return. If you are married and file a nonbusiness income, deduct it as a miscellane-tion, get Publication 529, Miscellaneous De-joint return, you and your spouse must com- ous itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formductions.bine your incomes and your social security and 1040).equivalent railroad retirement benefits when Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits If you repaid social security or equivalentfiguring whether any of your combined benefits paid to you by a union as strike or lockout railroad retirement benefits, see Publicationare taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive benefits, including both cash and the fair mar- 915.any benefits, you must add your spouse's in- ket value of other property, usually are included
come to yours when figuring if any of your in your income as compensation. You can ex- Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amountbenefits are taxable. clude these benefits from your income only you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromwhen the facts clearly show that the unionTaxable amount. Use the worksheet in your income in the year you repaid it. If youintended them as gifts to you.the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction pack- must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized
age to determine the amount of your benefits to deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),Reimbursed union convention expenses.
include in your income. Publication 915 also If you are a delegate of your local union chapter line 23.
has worksheets you can use. However, you and you attend the annual convention of the
must use the worksheets in Publication 915 if international union, do not include in your in- Repayment over $3,000. If the amount youany of the following situations apply. come amounts you receive from the interna- repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct
tional union to reimburse you for expenses of the repayment (as explained earlier under• You received a lump-sum benefit pay-
traveling away from home to attend the con- Type of deduction). However, you can choosement during the year that is for one or
vention. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex- instead to take a tax credit for the year ofmore earlier years.
penses, even if you are reimbursed in a later repayment if you included the income under a• You exclude employer-provided adoption year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you claim of right. This means that at the time youbenefits or interest from qualified U.S. must include that reimbursement in your in- included the income, it appeared that you hadsavings bonds. come. an unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for this
• You take the foreign earned income ex- choice, figure your tax under both methods andUtility rebates. If you are a customer of anclusion, the foreign housing exclusion or compare the results. Use the method (deduc-electric utility company and you participate indeduction, the exclusion of income from tion or credit) that results in less tax.the utility's energy conservation program, youAmerican Samoa, or the exclusion of in- may receive on your monthly electric bill either: Method 1. Figure your tax for 2009 claim-come from Puerto Rico by bona fide re- ing a deduction for the repaid amount. If yousidents of Puerto Rico. • A reduction in the purchase price of elec- must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemizedtricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),Benefits may affect your IRA deduction. • A nonrefundable credit against the line 28.You must use the special worksheets in appen- purchase price of the electricity.dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable Method 2. Figure your tax for 2009 claim-
benefits and your IRA deduction if all of the The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund- ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
following conditions apply. able credit is not included in your income. steps.
• You receive social security or equivalent 1. Figure your tax for 2009 without deduct-Whistleblower's award. If you receive arailroad retirement benefits. whistleblower's award from the Internal Reve- ing the repaid amount.
• You have taxable compensation. nue Service, you must include it in your in- 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearcome. Any deduction allowed for attorney fees• You contribute to your IRA. without including in income the amountand court costs paid by you, or on your behalf, you repaid in 2009.• You or your spouse is covered by a re- in connection with the award are deducted as
tirement plan at work. an adjustment to income, but cannot be more 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
than the amount included in income for the tax on your return for the earlier year. This is
How to report. If any of your benefits are year. the credit.
taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forForm 1040A to report the taxable part. You 2009 figured without the deduction (stepcannot use Form 1040EZ. Report your net ben- 1).efits (the amount in box 5 of your Forms Repayments
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) on line 20a of Form If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
1040 or line 14a of Form 1040A. Report the amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,If you had to repay an amount that you included
taxable part (from the last line of the worksheet) claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formin your income in an earlier year, you may be
on line 20b of Form 1040 or on line 14b of Form 1040, line 70, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in theable to deduct the amount repaid from your
1040A. column to the right of line 70.income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000,Stolen property. If you steal property, you Example. For 2008 you filed a return andyou may be able to take a credit against yourmust report its fair market value in your income reported your income on the cash method. Intax for the year in which you repaid it. Gener-in the year you steal it unless in the same year, 2009 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2008ally, you can claim a deduction or credit only ifyou return it to its rightful owner. income under a claim of right. Your filing statusthe repayment qualifies as an expense or loss
in 2009 and 2008 is single. Your income andTransporting school children. Do not in- incurred in your trade or business or in a
tax for both years are as follows:clude in your income a school board mileage for-profit transaction.
Page 36 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 37 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 • Our service is free, confidential, and tai- may be entitled to claim. To find the nearest
 With Income  Without Income lored to meet your needs. VITA or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040.
Taxable As part of the TCE program, AARP offers• You may be eligible for TAS help if youIncome $15,000 $10,000 the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find thehave tried to resolve your tax problem
Tax $ 1,853 $ 1,103 nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, callthrough normal IRS channels and have
1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website atgotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS2009 www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.procedure just isn't working as it should.Without Deduction With Deduction
For more information on these programs,• TAS helps taxpayers whose problemsTaxable
go to www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº inare causing financial difficulty or signifi-Income $49,950 $44,950
the upper right-hand corner.cant cost, including the cost of profes-Tax $ 8,681 $ 7,431 sional representation. This includes Internet. You can access the IRSYour tax under method 1 is $7,431. Your tax businesses as well as individuals. website at www.irs.gov 24 hours aunder method 2 is $7,931, figured as follows: day, 7 days a week to:• TAS employees know the IRS and how
to navigate it. We will listen to your prob-Tax previously determined for 2008 $1,853 • E-file your return. Find out about com-lem, help you understand what needs toLess: Tax as refigured ........ . − 1,103 mercial tax preparation and e-file serv-be done to resolve it, and stay with youDecrease in 2008 tax $ 750 ices available free to eligible taxpayers.every step of the way until your problem
• Check the status of your 2009 refund. Gois resolved.Regular tax liability for 2009 ..... . $8,681
to www.irs.gov and click on Where's MyLess: Decrease in 2008 tax ..... . − 750 • TAS has at least one local taxpayer ad- Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after theRefigured tax for 2009 $7,931 vocate in every state, the District of Co- IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filedlumbia, and Puerto Rico. You can callYou pay less tax using method 1, so you should return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing ayour local advocate, whose number is intake a deduction for the repayment in 2009. paper return. If you filed Form 8379 withyour phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifAdvocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the you filed electronically). Have your 2009Repayment rules do not apply. This dis- IRS, and on our website at www.irs.gov/ tax return available so you can providecussion does not apply to: advocate. You can also call our toll-free your social security number, your filingline at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD• Deductions for bad debts; status, and the exact whole dollar1-800-829-4059. amount of your refund.• Deductions for theft losses due to crimi-
• You can learn about your rights and re-nal fraud or embezzlement in a transac- • Download forms, instructions, and publi-sponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting ourtion entered into for profit; cations.online tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.• Deductions from sales to customers, • Order IRS products online.gov.such as returns and allowances, and sim-
• Research your tax questions online.ilar items; or Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).
• Search publications online by topic orThe Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program• Deductions for legal and other expenses
keyword.serves individuals who have a problem with theof contesting the repayment.
IRS and whose income is below a certain level. • Use the online Internal Revenue Code,LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most Regulations, or other official guidance.Year of deduction (or credit). If you use the LITCs can provide representation before thecash method, you can take the deduction (or • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)IRS or in court on audits, tax collection dis-credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which published in the last few years.putes, and other issues for free or a small fee. Ifyou actually make the repayment. If you use an individual's native language is not English, • Figure your withholding allowances usingany other accounting method, you can deduct some clinics can provide multilingual informa- the withholding calculator online at www.the repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tion about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. irs.gov/individuals.tax year in which it is a proper deduction under For more information, see Publication 4134,your accounting method. For example, if you • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed byLow Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publica-use an accrual method, you are entitled to the using our Alternative Minimum Taxtion is available at www.irs.gov, by callingdeduction or credit in the tax year in which the (AMT) Assistant.1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or atobligation for the repayment accrues. your local IRS office. • Sign up to receive local and national tax
news by email.
Free tax services. To find out what services • Get information on starting and operatingare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toHow To Get Tax Help a small business.Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax
information sources, including publications,You can get help with unresolved tax issues, services, and free tax education and assis-order free publications and forms, ask tax Phone. Many services are availabletance programs. It also has an index of overquestions, and get information from the IRS in by phone. 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)several ways. By selecting the method that is you can listen to on your telephone.
best for you, you will have quick and easy Accessible versions of IRS published prod- • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-access to tax help. ucts are available on request in a variety of tions. Call 1-800-TAX FORMalternative formats for people with disabilities. (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The forms, instructions, and publications, andTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- Free help with your return. Free help in prior-year forms and instructions. Youpendent organization within the IRS whose em- preparing your return is available nationwide should receive your order within 10 days.ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer In-economic harm, who are seeking help in • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withcome Tax Assistance (VITA) program is de-resolving tax problems that have not been re- your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.signed to help low-income taxpayers and thesolved through normal channels, or who be- Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program • Solving problems. You can getlieve that an IRS system or procedure is not is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 and face-to-face help solving tax problemsworking as it should. Here are seven things older with their tax returns. Many VITA sites every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-every taxpayer should know about TAS: offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
• TAS is your voice at the IRS. let you know about credits and deductions you plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
Publication 525 (2009) Page 37

Page 38 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your account, or help you set up a pay- Walk-in. Many products and services Mail. You can send your order for
are available on a walk-in basis. forms, instructions, and publicationsment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-
to the address below. You should re-sistance Center for an appointment. To
ceive a response within 10 days after yourfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/local- • Products. You can walk in to many post request is received.contacts or look in the phone book under offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pickUnited States Government, Internal Rev- up certain forms, instructions, and publi- Internal Revenue Serviceenue Service. cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro- 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaycery stores, copy centers, city and county• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access Bloomington, IL 61705-6613government offices, credit unions, and of-to TTY/TDD equipment, call
fice supply stores have a collection of1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or DVD for tax products. You can order
products available to print from a CD orto order forms and publications. Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products
photocopy from reproducible proofs. DVD, and obtain:
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to Also, some IRS offices and libraries havelisten to pre-recorded messages covering • Current-year forms, instructions, andthe Internal Revenue Code, regulations,various tax topics. publications.Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-• Refund information. To check the status • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-
poses.of your 2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 cations.
during business hours or 1-800-829-4477 • Services. You can walk in to your local • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and(automated refund information 24 hours a Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- finding aid.day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72 ness day for personal, face-to-face taxhours after the IRS acknowledges receipt • Tax law frequently asked questions.help. An employee can explain IRS let-of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks ters, request adjustments to your tax ac- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-after mailing a paper return. If you filed count, or help you set up a payment plan. sponse system.Form 8379 with your return, wait 14 If you need to resolve a tax problem,weeks (11 weeks if you filed electroni- • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thehave questions about how the tax lawcally). Have your 2009 tax return avail- U.S. Code.applies to your individual tax return, orable so you can provide your social you are more comfortable talking with • Fill-in, print, and save features for mostsecurity number, your filing status, and someone in person, visit your local Tax- tax forms.the exact whole dollar amount of your payer Assistance Center where you canrefund. Refunds are sent out weekly on • Internal Revenue Bulletins.spread out your records and talk with anFridays. If you check the status of your IRS representative face-to-face. No ap- • Toll-free and email technical support.refund and are not given the date it will pointment is necessaryÐjust walk in. Ifbe issued, please wait until the next week • Two releases during the year.you prefer, you can call your local Centerbefore checking back. ± The first release will ship the beginningand leave a message requesting an ap-
of January 2010.pointment to resolve a tax account issue.• Other refund information. To check the
± The final release will ship the begin-A representative will call you back withinstatus of a prior year refund or amended
ning of March 2010.2 business days to schedule an in-personreturn refund, call 1-800-829-1954.
appointment at your convenience. If you
Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalEvaluating the quality of our telephone have an ongoing, complex tax account
Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/services. To ensure IRS representatives give problem or a special need, such as a
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callaccurate, courteous, and professional an- disability, an appointment can be re-
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30swers, we use several methods to evaluate the quested. All other issues will be handled
(plus a $6 handling fee).quality of our telephone services. One method without an appointment. To find the num-
is for a second IRS representative to listen in ber of your local office, go to 
on or record random telephone calls. Another www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
is to ask some callers to complete a short phone book under United States Govern-
survey at the end of the call. ment, Internal Revenue Service.
Page 38 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 39 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Rehabilitative program Catch-up contributions ...... . 9, Daycare providers  (See also
payments ............... . 15 10 Childcare providers) ........ . 383(b) election ............... . 13
Retirement pay ............ . 15 Food program paymentsCharitable gift annuities .... . 31401(k) plans ................. . 9
Veterans benefits ......... . 15 to ...................... . 33Child and Adult Care FoodExcess contributions ....... . 10
Assistance  (See Tax help) De minimis benefits ....... . 5, 7Program:403(b) plans ................. . 9
Astronauts .................. . 2 Payments to daycare Death benefits  (See also LifeLimit for .................... . 9
providers ............... . 33 insurance) ................ . 21Athletic facilities,457 plans .................... . 9
Accelerated ............... . 22employer-provided ........ . 5 Child support payments .... . 31Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9
Debts:Automobile  (See Vehicle, Childcare providers ...... . 3, 33501(c)(18)(D) plans .......... . 9
employer-provided) Canceled ................. . 19Chronic illness ............. . 18Contributions .............. . 10
Excluded debt ............. . 20Autos: Accelerated death benefits paid501(c)(3) organizations ..... . 20
Cars: Nonrecourse debts ........ . 20to ...................... . 22529 program ............... . 35
Cash for clunkers ........ . 2 Recourse ................. . 20Citizens outside U.S.:1231 property sale ......... . 16
Stockholder's ............. . 20Awards  (See Damages from Exclusion of foreign
lawsuits) income .................. . 2 Deduction:
Costs of discriminationA Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title
suits .................... . 32VII:Academic health centers: B Back pay and damages for Deferred compensation:Meals and lodging when Babysitting .................. . 3 emotional distressteaching and research Nonqualified plans ........ . 2, 4Back pay, award for ......... . 3 under ................... . 32organization ............. . 7 Dependent care benefits .... . 5Backup withholding: Clergy ...................... . 14Accelerated death Depletion allowance ........ . 16Barter exchangebenefits .................. . 22 Coal ........................ . 16 Differential wagetransactions ............ . 19Accident insurance .......... . 5 COBRA .................... . 18 payments ................. . 4Bankruptcy:Accidental death benefits ... . 6 Colleges and universities: Armed forces ............. . 15Canceled debt not deemed to Faculty lodging ............. . 7Accrual method taxpayers .. . 2 Directors' fees ............. . 33be income .............. . 20 Scholarships andAccrued leave payment: Disability:Barter income .............. . 19 fellowships .............. . 35At time of retirement or Military ................... . 15Below-market loans ........ . 31 Comments on publication ... . 3resignation ............... . 4 Pensions ................. . 17Bequest for services ....... . 34Disability retirement ....... . 17 Commissions: Workers'Bicycle ...................... . 8 Advance ................... . 3Activity not for profit ....... . 31 compensation ......... . 18Fringe benefit .............. . 8 Commuter highwayAdoption: Person with ............... . 30Black lung benefit vehicles ................... . 8Employer assistance ....... . 5 Unemployment compensation,payments ................ . 18 paid as substitute for .... . 29Compensation:Advance commissions ...... . 3 Bonuses ................. . 3, 35 Employee .................. . 3 Disaster relief:Aircraft ...................... . 8 Breach of contract: Miscellaneous .............. . 3 Disaster mitigationAirlines: Damages as income ....... . 32 Unemployment ............ . 29 payments ............... . 30No-additional-cost Bribes ...................... . 31 Workers' .................. . 18 Disaster Relief and Emergencyservices ................. . 7
Business expenses: Compensatory damages .. . 19, Assistance Act:Valuation of flights on
Reimbursements ........... . 3 32 Grants .................. . 30employer-provided
Business income ........ . 15-17aircraft ................... . 8 UnemploymentConstructive receipt of
benefits .............. . 29income .................... . 2Alaska Permanent Fund
Midwestern disasterdividend ................. . 31 Copyrights:C areas ................. . 7, 20Infringement damages ..... . 32Alien status, waiver of ...... . 15 Cafeteria plans ............. . 17 Mitigation payments ........ . 2Royalties ................. . 16Aliens: Campaign contributions .... . 31 Payments ................. . 30Corporate directors ........ . 33Nonresident ............... . 23 Campus lodging ............. . 7 Discounts:Cost-of-living allowances ... . 4Alimony .................... . 31 Cancellation of debt ........ . 19 Employee discounts ........ . 6Court awards  (See alsoAlternative minimum tax (AMT): Cancellation of sales Employee stock purchaseDamages from lawsuits) ... . 31Recoveries, refiguring of ... . 29 contracts ................. . 31 plans ................... . 12Stock options ............. . 12 Credit card Insurance ...... . 32Capital gains or losses: Mortgage loan for earlyAnnuities: Credits:Employee stock option plans payment ................ . 20Charitable gift ............. . 31 Recoveries, refiguring of(ESOPs) ................ . 12 Dividends:Railroad retirement ........ . 35 unused credits ...... . 28, 29Incentive stock options Restricted stock ........... . 13Tax-sheltered .............. . 9 Currency transactions,(ISOs) .................. . 12 Divorced taxpayers:Archer MSAs ............. . 5, 34 foreign ................... . 33Sale of personal Stock options exercised incidentArmed forces ............... . 15 property ................ . 35 to divorce ............... . 11Combat zone bonus ....... . 15 Car  (See Vehicle, D Down paymentDifferential wage employer-provided) assistance ............... . 32Damages from lawsuits .... . 31payments ................ . 1 Car pools .................. . 31 Back pay awards ........... . 3Disability .................. . 15 Cars: Breach of contract ......... . 32Disability pensions ........ . 17 Cash for clunkers ......... . 31 ECompensatoryHealth professions
Cash or deferred arrangements Economic recoverydamages ........... . 19, 32scholarship .............. . 8
(CODAs) .................. . 9 payment .................. . 1Emotional distress under TitleMilitary action as cause of
Cash rebates ............... . 31 Government retiree credit:VII, Civil Rights Act ofdisability injuries ........ . 17
1964 ................... . 32Qualified reservist Casualty insurance: Making work pay
distribution .............. . 15 Reimbursements from ..... . 31 Punitive damages ......... . 32 credit ................. . 32
Publication 525 (2009) Page 39

Page 40 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Educational assistance: Reporting Royalties ................. . 16 Form 2441:
requirement-statement........................ . 33 Child and dependent careEmployer-provided ......... . 5 Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
expenses ................ . 5Scholarships and Bartering .................. . 19
fellowships .............. . 35 Form 4255:Childcare providers toF Recapture of investmentEducational institutions: use ...................... . 3Faculty lodging ............. . 7 credit ................... . 29Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Personal property rental,
Fair market value (FMV) ..... . 8 Form 6251:Elderly persons: reporting income from ... . 16
Stock options ............. . 11 Alternative minimum tax ... . 12Nutrition Program for the Royalties ................. . 16
Farming: Form 8839:Elderly .................. . 31 Form 1040, Schedule D:Qualified farm debt, cancellation Adoption assistance ........ . 5Tax Counseling for the Stock options ............. . 12of ...................... . 20 Form 8853:Elderly .................. . 15 Stock options reportedFederal employees: Accelerated deathElection precinct on ...................... . 12Accrued leave payment ..... . 4 benefits ................. . 22officials .................. . 33 Form 1040, Schedule E:Compensation Act (FECA) Archer MSAs and long-termElective deferrals ............ . 9 Partner's return ........... . 16payments ............... . 18 care insuranceCatch-up contributions ...... . 9, Royalties ................. . 16Cost-of-living allowances ... . 4 contracts ................ . 510 Form 1040A:Disability pensions ........ . 17 Form 8919:Excess annual additions ... . 11 Recoveries ............... . 23Thrift Savings Plan for ...... . 9 Uncollected social security andExcess contributions ....... . 10 UnemploymentFederal income tax: Medicare tax on wages ... . 3Excess deferrals .......... . 10 compensation ........... . 29Refunds .................. . 22 Form RRB-1099:Increased limit for last 3 years Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3Fees for services ........... . 33 Railroad retirement boardprior to retirement age ... . 10 Form 1040EZ:Financial counseling fees ... . 6 payments ............... . 36Limit on .................... . 9 Recoveries ............... . 23Fellowships ................ . 35 Form SSA-1099:Reporting by employer ..... . 10 UnemploymentFICA withholding: Social security benefitEmotional distress compensation ........... . 29Foreign employers, U.S. statement ............... . 35damages ................. . 32 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3citizens working for in Form W-2:Employee achievement U.S. .................... . 14 Form 1041: 501(c)(18)(D)awards .................... . 3 Paid by employer ........... . 4 Estates and trusts ......... . 32 contributions ............ . 10Employee awards or Fiduciaries: Accrued leave payment at timeForm 1041, Schedule K-1:bonuses ................. . 35 Fees for services .......... . 33 of retirement orBeneficiary's share of income,Employee resignation ............... . 4Financial counseling fees  (See deductions, credits,compensation .......... . 3-14 Back pay awards ........... . 3also Retirement planning etc. ..................... . 32Fringe benefits ........... . 4-9 services) ................... . 6 Bonuses or awards ......... . 3Form 1065:Restricted property ..... . 13-14 Elective deferrals, reporting byFitness programs: Partnership return ......... . 16Retirement plan employer ............... . 10Employer-provided ......... . 5 Form 1065, Schedule K-1:contributions ............. . 9 Failure to receive fromFlights: Partner's share ofStock options .......... . 11-13 employer ................ . 3Employer-provided income ................. . 16Employee discounts ........ . 6 Fringe benefits reportedaircraft ................... . 8 Form 1098:Employee stock purchase on ....................... . 5No-additional-cost Mortgage interestplans ..................... . 12 Stock options fromservices ................. . 7 statement ............... . 22Employer, foreign .......... . 14 employers .............. . 11Food benefits: Form 1099-B: Wage and tax statement .... . 3Employer-owned life Daycare providers, food Barter exchangeinsurance ................ . 21 Form W-2G:program payments to .... . 33 transactions ............ . 19 Gambling winnings ........ . 34Employer-provided: Nutrition Program for the
Form 1099-C:Educational assistance ..... . 5 Form W-4V:Elderly .................. . 31
Cancellation of debt ....... . 20 Unemployment compensation,Vehicles ................... . 8 Foreign:
Form 1099-DIV: voluntary withholdingEmployment: Currency transactions ..... . 33
request ................. . 30Restricted stockAbroad ................... . 15 Employment .............. . 14
dividends ............... . 13 Form W-9:Governments, employeesAgency fees .............. . 32
Request for taxpayerForm 1099-G:of ...................... . 14Contracts:
identification number .... . 19Income .................... . 2 State tax refunds .......... . 22Severance pay for
Service ................... . 17 Foster care ................. . 33cancellation of ......... . 4 Unemployment
Form 1040: Foster Grandparentcompensation ........... . 29Endowment proceeds ...... . 21
Excess contributions to elective Program ................. . 15Form 1099-MISC:Energy:
deferrals ................ . 10 Found property ............ . 33Services totaling $600 orAssistance ................ . 31
Recoveries ............... . 23 more ................... . 33 Free tax services ........... . 37Conservation:
Unemployment Stock options exercised incident Fringe benefits ............ . 4-9Subsidies ............... . 32 compensation ........... . 29 to divorce ............... . 11 Accident and healthUtility rebates ........... . 36 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 insurance ................ . 5Form 1099-R:Estate income .............. . 32 Form 1040 or 1040A, Schedule Adoption, employerCharitable gift annuities .... . 31Estimated tax: B: assistance ............... . 5Excess annual additions ... . 11Unemployment Restricted stock Athletic facilities ............ . 5compensation ........... . 30 Excess deferraldividends ............... . 13 Bicycle commuters ......... . 2amounts ................ . 10Excess: Form 1040, Schedule A: Commuter highwaySurrender of life insuranceAnnual additions .......... . 11 Outplacement services, vehicles ................. . 8policy for cash .......... . 21Contributions .............. . 10 deduction for ............. . 4 Commuters ................ . 2Form 1120-POL:Deferrals .................. . 10 Repayment of commissions De minimis benefits ...... . 5, 7Political organizations ..... . 31Expected inheritance ....... . 34 paid in advance .......... . 3 Dependent care benefits .... . 5
Form 1120S:Expenses paid by Form 1040, Schedule C: Educational assistance ..... . 5
another .................. . 32 S corporation return ....... . 16Bartering .................. . 19 Employee discounts ........ . 6
Exxon Valdez settlement ... . 32 Form 1120S, Schedule K-1:Childcare providers to Faculty lodging ............. . 7
Eligible retirement plan .... . 33 use ...................... . 3 Shareholder's share of income, Financial counseling fees ... . 6
Income averaging ......... . 33 Personal property rental, credits, deductions, Holiday gifts ................ . 5
reporting income from ... . 16Legal expenses ........... . 33 etc. ..................... . 16 Meals and lodging .......... . 7
Page 40 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 41 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fringe benefits (Cont.) Business and Strike and lockout MSAs (Medical savings
Moving expenses (See Moving investment .......... . 15, 17 benefits ................. . 36 accounts) ................ . 34
expenses) Constructive receipt of ...... . 2 Unemployment benefits paid
No-additional-cost Estate and trust ........... . 32 from .................... . 30 Nservices ................. . 7 Foreign employers ........ . 14 Last day of tax year, income National Health Service CorpsParking .................... . 8 Illegal ..................... . 34 received on ............... . 2 Scholarship Program ..... . 8Retirement planning (See Miscellaneous ............. . 19 Leave  (See Accrued leave National Oceanic andRetirement planning services) Other ..................... . 31 payment) AtmosphericTransit pass ................ . 8 Partnership ............... . 16 Length-of-service awards ... . 4 Administration ........... . 17Tuition reduction ........... . 8 Prepaid .................... . 2 Life insurance: National Senior ServiceValuation of .............. . 8-9 S corporation ............. . 16 Employer-owned .......... . 21 Corps .................... . 15Vehicle .................... . 8 Indian fishing rights ........ . 34 Proceeds ................. . 21Working condition No-additional-costIndividual retirement Surrender of policy forbenefits .................. . 8 services ................... . 7arrangements (IRAs): cash .................... . 21Frozen deposits: Nobel prize ................. . 35Deduction ................. . 36 Loans  (See alsoInterest on ................ . 34 No-fault car insurance:Inherited IRA .............. . 34 Mortgage) ................ . 20 Disability benefits under ... . 19Inheritance ................. . 34 Below-market ............. . 31 Nonrecourse debt .......... . 20IRA ....................... . 34 Student ................... . 20G Property not substantially Nonstatutory stockLockout benefits ........... . 36Gambling winnings and vested .................. . 14 options .................. . 11losses .................... . 33 Lodging:Injury benefits ........... . 17-19 Nontaxable income .......... . 2Campus lodging ............ . 7Gas: Insurance: Notary fees ................. . 33Royalties from ............ . 16 Clergy .................... . 14Credit card ................ . 32 Notes received forEmployer-paid orGifts ....................... . 34 Health ..................... . 5 services ................... . 4reimbursed .............. . 7Holiday gifts from Life (See Life insurance) Not-for-profit activities ..... . 31employer ................ . 5 Faculty lodging ............. . 7Long-term care (See Long-term Nutrition Program for theReplacement housingGovernment employees  (See care insurance) Elderly ................... . 31payments ............... . 31Federal employees; State Interest:employees) Long-term careCanceled debt including ... . 20
insurance .............. . 5, 17Grantor trusts .............. . 32 OFrozen deposits ........... . 34
Lotteries and raffles ........ . 33Group-term life insurance: Oil:Mortgage refunds ......... . 22
Worksheets .............. . 6, 7 Lump-sum distributions: Royalties from ............ . 16Option on insurance ....... . 21
Survivor benefits .......... . 29Recovery amounts ........ . 22 Old-age, survivors, and
Savings bond ............. . 34 disability insurance benefitsH State and local government (OASDI) .................. . 31HAMP: Mobligations .............. . 34 Options, stock ......... . 11, 13Home affordable modification Manufacturer incentiveInterference with business Outplacement services ...... . 4program: payments ................ . 34operations: Overseas work .............. . 2Pay-for-performance success Meals:Damages as income ....... . 32payments ........... . 2, 30 Employer-paid orInternational organizations,Health: Preimbursed .............. . 7employees of ............ . 14Flexible spending Parking fees:Nutrition Program for theInterview expenses ......... . 34arrangement ............. . 5 Employer-paid orElderly .................. . 31Investment counseling fees Insurance .................. . 5 reimbursed .............. . 8Medical:(See also Retirement planningReimbursement Partner and partnershipCare reimbursements ...... . 19services) ................... . 6arrangement ............. . 5 income ................... . 16Responders, emergency ... . 15Investment income ..... . 15, 17Savings account ......... . 2, 5 Patents:Savings accounts ......... . 34IRA:Help  (See Tax help) Infringement damages ..... . 32Medicare:Roth IRA ................... . 2Highly compensated Royalties ................. . 16Advantage MSAs .......... . 34IRAs  (See Individual retirementemployees: Peace Corps ............... . 15Benefits .................. . 31arrangements (IRAs))Excess contributions to elective Pensions:Tax paid by employer ....... . 4Iron ore .................... . 16deferrals ................ . 10 Clergy .................... . 14Medicare tax  (See SocialItemized deductions:Historic preservation Disability pensions ........ . 17security and Medicare taxes)Limited ................... . 24grants .................... . 34 Inherited pensions ......... . 34Military  (See Armed forces)Recoveries ........... . 22, 23Hobby losses .............. . 34 Military ................... . 15Minerals:Holding period Personal property:Royalties from ............ . 16requirement .............. . 12 Rental income andJ Miscellaneous:Holiday gifts ................ . 5 expense ................ . 16Job interview expenses .... . 34 Compensation ............. . 3Holocaust victims Sale of .................... . 35Joint returns: Income ................... . 19restitution ................ . 34 Personal representatives  (SeeSocial security benefits or Missing children, photographsHome, sale of .............. . 35 Fiduciaries)railroad retirement of ......................... . 2Host or hostess ............ . 21 Prepaid income ............. . 2payments ............... . 36 More information  (See Tax help)Hotels: Price reduced afterJury duty pay .............. . 34 Mortgage:No-additional-cost purchase ................. . 20
Assistance payment ....... . 31services ................. . 7 Prizes and awards ........ . 3, 34
Discounted loan ........... . 20Housing  (See Lodging) Achievement awards ....... . 3K
Interest refund ............ . 22 Employee awards orKickbacks .................. . 34 Qualified principal residence bonuses ................ . 35
I indebtedness ........... . 21 Length-of-service awards ... . 4
Relief ..................... . 20Illegal activities ............ . 34 L Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar
Motor vehicle,Incentive stock options prizes .................. . 35Labor unions:
employer-provided ........ . 8(ISOs) .................... . 12 Safety achievement ........ . 4Convention expenses,
Scholarship prizes ......... . 35Moving expenses:Income: reimbursed ............. . 36
Reimbursements ........ . 3, 34Assigned .................. . 2 Dues ..................... . 36 Profit-sharing plan ......... . 17
Publication 525 (2009) Page 41

Page 42 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Public assistance Retirement planning Stock options .......... . 11, 13 Reimbursements ........... . 3
benefits .................. . 30 services ................. . 6, 8 School children, transportingStock options, nonstatutory:
of ...................... . 36Public Health Service ....... . 17 Retirement plans  (See also Exercise or transfer ........ . 11
Pensions) ................. . 15 Grant ..................... . 11 Trusts:Public safety officers killed in
Automatic contribution Sale ...................... . 11 Grantor trusts ............. . 32line of duty ............... . 29
arrangements ............ . 9 Income ................... . 32Stock options, statutory:Public transportation passes,
Contributions ............ . 9, 11 Exercise .................. . 12 TTY/TDD information ....... . 37employer-provided ........ . 8
Elective deferrals (See Elective Grant ..................... . 12 Tuition program, qualifiedPublications  (See Tax help) deferrals) Sale ...................... . 12 (QTP) .................... . 35Pulitzer prize ............... . 35 Rewards ................... . 35 Stockholder debts .......... . 20 Tuition reduction ............ . 8Punitive damages .......... . 32 Roth contributions ......... . 10 Stolen property ............ . 36
Royalties ................... . 16 Strike benefits .............. . 36 UQ Student loans: UnemploymentQualified Joint Venture ...... . 2 Cancellation of debt ....... . 20S compensation .......... . 2, 29Qualified tuition program Substantial risk ofS corporations ............. . 16 Charity .................... . 2(QTP) .................... . 35 forfeiture ................. . 13Safety achievement Unions  (See Labor unions)
Substantially vestedawards .................... . 4 Unlawful discrimination suits:R property .................. . 13Salary reduction simplified Deduction for costs ........ . 32Raffles ..................... . 33 Suggestions foremployee pension plans  (See
Railroad: publication ................ . 3SARSEPs) VRetirement annuities ....... . 35 Supplemental security incomeSale of home ............... . 35 VA payments ............... . 35Retirement benefits ........ . 35 (SSI) payments ........... . 35Sales contracts: Valuation:Sick pay .................. . 18 Supplemental unemploymentCancellation of ............ . 31 Fringe benefits ........... . 8, 9Unemployment compensation benefits .................. . 30SARSEPs ................... . 9 Stock options ............. . 11benefits ................. . 29 Surviving spouse:Excess contributions ....... . 10 Vehicle:Real estate: Life insurance proceeds paidSavings bonds ............. . 34 Commuter highway ......... . 8Qualified real property business to ...................... . 21Savings incentive match plans Employer-provided ......... . 8debt, cancellation of ..... . 20 Survivor benefits ........... . 29for employees  (See SIMPLE Veterans benefits .......... . 15Real property tax ........... . 22 plans) Disability compensation .... . 17Rebates: Scholarships and T Retroactive VACash ..................... . 31 fellowships ............... . 35 Tables and figures: determination ........... . 17Utility ..................... . 36 Self-employed persons: Group-term life insurance Special statute ofRecovery of amounts U.S. citizens working for foreign (Table 1) ................ . 6 limitations. .............. . 17previously deducted .... . 22, employers in U.S. treated Standard deduction (Tables Viatical settlements ........ . 2224 as ...................... . 14 2-4) ......... . 24, 26, 27, 28 Volunteer work ............. . 15Itemized deductions ... . 22, 23 Senior Companion Tax benefit rule ............ . 22 Emergency medicalNon-itemized Program ................. . 15 Tax Counseling for the responders ............. . 15deductions .............. . 29
Service Corps of Retired Elderly ................... . 15 Firefighters ............... . 15Unused tax credits, refiguring
Executives (SCORE) ..... . 15 Tax help .................... . 37 Tax counseling (Volunteerof .................. . 28, 29
Severance pay .............. . 4 Income Tax AssistanceTaxpayer Advocate ......... . 37Worksheet of itemized
Outplacement services ..... . 4 Program) ............... . 15deductions (Worksheet Tax-sheltered annuity plans
Sick pay ..................... . 42) ...................... . 25 Volunteers in Service to(403(b) plans) ............. . 9
America (VISTA) ......... . 15Sickness and injury Limit for .................... . 9Refunds:
benefits .............. . 17, 19Federal income tax ........ . 22 Terminal illness ............ . 22
Mortgage interest ......... . 22 SIMPLE plans ............... . 9 Terrorist attacks: WState tax .................. . 22 Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 Disability payments for injuries W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Rehabilitative program Smallpox vaccine from .................... . 17 Welfare benefits ............ . 30payments ................ . 15 injuries ................... . 35 Victims of, tax relief ......... . 2 Whistleblower .............. . 36Reimbursements: Social security and Medicare Thrift Savings Plan .......... . 9 Winter energy payments ... . 31Business expenses ......... . 3 taxes: Title VII, Civil Rights Act of Withholding:Casualty losses ........... . 31 Foreign employers, U.S. 1964: Barter exchangeMeals and lodging .......... . 7 citizens working for in Back pay and damages for transactions ............ . 19Medical expenses ......... . 19 U.S. .................... . 14 emotional distress UnemploymentMoving expenses ....... . 3, 34 Paid by employer ........... . 4 under ................... . 32 compensation ........... . 30Related party transactions: Social security benefits .... . 35 Tour guides, free tours Workers' compensation .... . 18Stock option transfer ....... . 11 Standard deduction: for ....................... . 33 Working conditionReligious order Recoveries ............... . 24 Trade Act of 1974: benefits ................... . 8members ................. . 14 Tables (2008-2006) ... . 24, 26, Trade readjustment allowances Worksheets:27, 28Rental income and expenses: under ............... . 29, 30 Group-term life insurancePersonal property rental ... . 16 State employees: Transferable property ...... . 13 (Worksheet 1) .......... . 6, 7Reporting of ............... . 16 Unemployment benefits paid Transit passes .............. . 8 Recoveries of itemizedto ...................... . 30Repayments ............. . 36-37 Travel agencies: deductions (WorksheetState or local governments:Repossession .............. . 31 Free tour to organizer of group 2) ...................... . 25Interest on obligations of ... . 34Restricted property ..... . 13, 14 of tourists ............... . 33 Work-training programs .... . 30State or local taxes:Retired Senior Volunteer Travel and transportation
Refunds .................. . 22 ■Program (RSVP) .......... . 15 expenses:
Statutory stock option holding Free tours from travelRetirement:
period .................... . 12 agencies ............... . 33Settlement ................. . 2
Stock appreciation rights .... . 4 Fringe benefits ............. . 8
Page 42 Publication 525 (2009)

Page 43 of 43 of Publication 525 9:48 - 26-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2010
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2010
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity,
Hope, and Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay and Government Retiree Credits
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547SP
Publication 525 (2009) Page 43