Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.sgm (17-May-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
Important Change for 2001.......... 1Department
of the Important Changes for 2002......... 2Taxable andTreasury
Important Reminders.............. 2Internal
Revenue Nontaxable Introduction..................... 2Service
Employee Compensation ........... 2Income Miscellaneous Compensation....... 2
Fringe Benefits................ 3
Retirement Plan Contributions...... 7
Stock Options................. 8For use in preparing Restricted Property.............. 9
Special Rules for Certain2001 Returns
Employees ................... 10
Clergy ...................... 10
Members of Religious Orders....... 11
Foreign Employer............... 12
Military...................... 12
Volunteers................... 12
Business and Investment Income..... 12
Rents From Personal Property...... 13
Royalties.................... 13
Partnership Income............. 13
S Corporation Income............ 13
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 14
Disability Pensions.............. 14
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 14
Workers’ Compensation.......... 15
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 15
Miscellaneous Income ............. 15
Bartering.................... 15
Canceled Debts................ 16
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 17
Recoveries................... 17
Survivor Benefits............... 23
Unemployment Benefits.......... 23
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 24
Other Income................. 24
Repayments .................... 28
How To Get Tax Help.............. 29
Index.......................... 31
Important Change for
2001
Advance payment of the rate reduction
credit.If you received a check from the IRS
during 2001 for the advance payment of the rate
reduction credit, do not report it on your tax
return. It is not taxable. For more information
about the rate reduction credit, see Publication
553, Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes and the
Rate Reduction Credit Worksheet in the instruc-
tions for Form 1040 (or Form 1040A or 1040EZ).

Page 2 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Constructively received income.You are ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
generally taxed on income that is available toImportant Changes for ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentyou, regardless of whether it is actually in your Railroad Retirement Benefitspossession.2002
See How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofA valid check that you received or that was
this publication, for information about gettingmade available to you before the end of the taxRetirement planning services.Beginning in these publications.year is considered income constructively re-2002, if your employer has a qualified retirementceived in that year, even if you do not cash theplan, qualified retirement planning services pro-check or deposit it to your account until the nextvided for you (or your spouse) by your employeryear. For example, if the postal service tries towill not be included in your income. For moredeliver a check to you on the last day of the taxEmployeeinformation, see Publication 553, Highlights ofyear but you are not at home to receive it, you2001 Tax Changes. must include the amount in your income for thatCompensation
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldElective deferrals.Beginning in 2002, the
not possibly reach you until after the end of theGenerally, you must include in gross incomelimit on the amount of your wages you can elect
tax year, and you could not otherwise get theeverything you receive in payment for personalto defer into certain retirement plans (such as
funds before the end of the year, you include theservices. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-section 401(k) plans) will increase each year
amount in your income for the next tax year.sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofover a 5-year period. If you are age 50 or older,
Income received by an agent for you is in-compensation such as fringe benefits and stockyou will also be able to make additional
come you constructively received in the year theoptions.catch-up elective deferrals. See Elective Defer-
agent received it. If you agree by contract that aYou should receive a Form W–2, Wage andrals in the discussion on retirement plan contri-
third party is to receive income for you, you mustTax Statement, from your employer showing thebutions under Employee Compensation.
include the amount in income when the thirdpay you received for your services. Include your
party receives it. pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on
line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-
Example. You and your employer agree ceive a Form W–2.Important Reminders that part of your salary is to be paid directly toChild-care providers.If you provide childyour former spouse. You must include thatForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or care, either in the child’s home or in your homeamount in income when your former spouseresident alien, you must report income from or other place of business, the pay you receivereceives it.sources outside the United States (foreign in- must be included in your income. If you are not
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by an employee, you are probably self-employedPrepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside and must include payments for your services oncompensation for future services, is generally
or outside the United States and whether or not Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromincluded in your income in the year you receive
you receive a Form W–2 or 1099 from the Business, or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Netit. However, if you use an accrual method of
foreign payer. This applies to earned income Profit From Business. You are generally not anaccounting, you can defer prepaid income you
(such as wages and tips) as well as unearned employee unless you are subject to the will andreceive for services to be performed before the
income (such as interest, dividends, capital control of the person who employs you as toend of the next tax year. In this case, you include
gains, pensions, rents, and royalties). what you are to do and how you are to do it.the payment in your income as you earn it by
If you reside outside the United States, youperforming the services. Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives ormay be able to exclude part or all of your foreign neighborhood children, whether on a regularsource earned income. For details, see Publica-Comments and suggestions. We welcome basis or only periodically, the rules for child-caretion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-your comments about this publication and yourproviders apply to you.dent Aliens Abroad. suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site
Photographs of missing children.The Inter- Miscellaneousat www.irs.gov.
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the CompensationYou can write to us at the following address:
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected This section discusses many types of employeeInternal Revenue Service
by the Center may appear in this publication on compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-Technical Publications Branch
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can phabetical order.W:CAR:MP:FP:P
help bring these children home by looking at the1111 Constitution Ave. NW Advance commissions and other earnings.photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST Washington, DC 20224 If you receive advance commissions or other(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child. amounts for services to be performed in the
future and you are a cash method taxpayer, youWe respond to many letters by telephone.
must include these amounts in your income inTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
the year you receive them.clude your daytime phone number, including theIntroduction If you repay unearned commissions or otherarea code, in your correspondence.
amounts in the same year you receive them,You can receive income in the form of money,
reduce the amount included in your income byproperty, or services. This publication discussesUseful Items
the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxmany kinds of income and explains whetherYou may want to see:
year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-
ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-Publication
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, S❏ 520 Scholarships and Fellowships See Repayments, later.corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-
mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-❏ 523 Selling Your Home Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-ceeds, and welfare and other public assistance ceive travel, transportation, or other business❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertybenefits. Check the index for the location of a expense allowances or reimbursements from(Including Rental of Vacationspecific subject. your employer, get Publication 463, Travel, En-Homes)Generally, income is taxable unless it is spe- tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you arecifically exempted by law. Income that is taxable❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses reimbursed for moving expenses, get Publica-must be reported on your return and is subject to tion 521, Moving Expenses.❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andtax. Income that is nontaxable may have to be Administratorsshown on your tax return but is not subject to Back pay awards. Include in income amounts
tax. ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
Page 2

Page 3 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
back pay. These include payments made to youNote received for services.If your employer them from your gross wages, you must report
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, gives you a secured note as payment for your the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
and unpaid health insurance premiums. They services, you must include the fair market value on your tax return. The payment is also treated
should be reported to you by your employer on (usually the discount value) of the note in your as wages for figuring your social security and
Form W –2. income for the year you receive it. When you Medicare taxes and your social security and
later receive payments on the note, a propor- Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsBonuses and awards.  Bonuses or awards tionate part of each payment is the recovery of are not treated as social security and Medicareyou receive for outstanding work are included inthe fair market value that you previously in- wages if you are a household worker or a farmyour income and should be shown on your Formcluded in your income. Do not include that part worker.W –2. These include prizes such as vacationagain in your income. Include the rest of thetrips for meeting sales goals. If the prize or Stock appreciation rights.Do not include apayment in your income in the year of payment.award you receive is goods or services, you stock appreciation right granted by your em-If your employer gives you an unsecuredmust include the fair market value of the goods ployer in income until you exercise (use) thenote as payment for your services, payments onor services in your income. However, if your right. When you use the right, you are entitled tothe note that are credited toward the principalemployer merely promises to pay you a bonus or a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofamount of the note are compensation incomeaward at some future time, it is not taxable until the corporation’s stock on the date of use, minuswhen you receive them.you receive it or it is made available to you. the fair market value on the date the right was
granted. You include the cash payment in in-Severance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-Employee achievement award. If you re- come in the year you use the right.erance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentceive tangible personal property (other than
for cancellation of your employment contractcash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as Work-training programs.If you are enrolledmust be included in your income in the tax yearan award for length-of-service or safety achieve- in a state or local work-training program underyou receive it.ment, you can generally exclude its value from the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, pay-
your income. However, the amount you can ex- ments you receive from the sponsor as compen-Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed-
clude is limited to your employer’s cost and sation for services are taxable wages.eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsfor accrued annual leave when you retire or
that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchresign, this amount will be included as wages onFringe Benefitsawards you receive during the year. Your em-your Form W–2.
ployer can tell you whether your award is a Fringe benefits you receive in connection withIf you resign from one agency and are reem-
qualified plan award. Your employer must make the performance of your services are included inployed by another agency, you may have to
the award as part of a meaningful presentation, your income as compensation unless you payrepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
under conditions and circumstances that do not fair market value for them or they are specificallyment to the second agency. You can reduce
create a significant likelihood of it being dis- excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-gross wages by the amount you repaid in the
guised pay. ance of services (for example, under a covenantsame tax year in which you received it. Attach to
However, the exclusion does not apply to the not to compete) is treated as the performance ofyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
following awards. services for purposes of these rules.given to you by the agency you repaid to explain
See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thisthe difference between the wages on your return• A length-of-service award if you received it
discussion, for information on how to determineand the wages on your Forms W–2.for less than 5 years of service or if you
the amount to include in income.received another length-of-service awardOutplacement services. If you choose to
during the year or the previous 4 years.accept a reduced amount of severance pay soRecipient of fringe benefit.You are the re-
that you can receive outplacement servicescipient of a fringe benefit if you perform the• A safety achievement award if you are a
(such as training in resum´e writing and interviewservices for which the fringe benefit is provided.manager, administrator, clerical employee,
techniques), you must include the unreducedYou are considered to be the recipient even if itor other professional employee or if more
amount of the severance pay in income. is given to another person, such as a member ofthan 10% of eligible employees previously
However, you can deduct the value of theseyour family. An example is a car your employerreceived safety achievement awards dur-
outplacement services (up to the difference be-gives to your spouse for services you perform.ing the year.
tween the severance pay included in incomeThe car is considered to have been provided to
and the amount actually received) as a miscella-you and not to your spouse.Example. Ben Green received three em- neous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) onYou do not have to be an employee of theployee achievement awards during the year: aSchedule A (Form 1040). provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. Ifnonqualified plan award of a watch valued at you are a partner, director, or independent con-$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoSick pay. Pay you receive from your employertractor, you can also be the recipient of a fringevalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atwhile you are sick or injured is part of your salarybenefit.$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-or wages. In addition, you must include in your
Provider of benefit.Your employer or an-fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachincome sick pay benefits received from any of
other person for whom you perform services isaward by itself would be excluded from income.the following payers.
the provider of a fringe benefit regardless ofHowever, since the $1,750 total value of the
1) A welfare fund. whether that person actually provides the fringeawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
benefit to you. The provider can be a client or$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income. 2) A state sickness or disability fund. customer of an independent contractor.Government cost-of-living allowances. 3) An association of employers or employ-
Cost-of-living allowances are generally included Accounting period. You must use the sameees.
in your income. However, they are not included accounting period your employer uses to report
4) An insurance company, if your employerin your income if you are a federal civilian em- your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-
paid for the plan.ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- ployer has the option to report taxable noncash
tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United fringe benefits by using either of the followingHowever, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
States. rules.dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you
Allowances and differentials that increasereceive under the policy are not taxable. For• The general rule: benefits are reported foryour basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessmore information, see Other Sickness and Injury a full calendar year (January 1 – Decem-desirable post of duty are part of your compen-Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits, ber 31).sation and must be included in income. Forlater.
example, your compensation includes Foreign • The special accounting period rule: bene-
Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas TropicalSocial security and Medicare taxes paid by fits provided during the last 2 months of
differentials. For more information, get Publica-employer. If you and your employer have an the calendar year (or any shorter period)
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesagreement that your employer pays your social are treated as paid during the following
Stationed Abroad. security and Medicare taxes without deducting calendar year. For example, each year
Page 3

Page 4 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your employer reports the value of bene- not included in your compensation. The gymEducational Assistance
fits provided during the last 2 months of must be used primarily by employees, their
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250the prior year and the first 10 months of spouses, and their dependent children.
of qualified employer-provided educational as-the current year. If your employer pays for a fitness programsistance. The exclusion does not apply toprovided to you at an off-site resort hotel orYour employer does not have to use the same graduate-level courses beginning before Janu-athletic club, the value of the program is in-accounting period for each fringe benefit, but ary 1, 2002. For more information, get Publica-cluded in your compensation.must use the same period for all employees who tion 508, Tax Benefits for Work-Relatedreceive a particular benefit. Education.
You must use the same accounting periodDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
that you use to report the benefit to claim an
Employee DiscountsIf your employer provides you with a product oremployee business deduction (for use of a car,
service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldfor example). If your employer sells you property or services atbe unreasonable for the employer to account for
a discount, you may be able to exclude theit, the value is not included in your income.Form W –2. Your employer reports your taxa-
amount of the discount from your income. TheGenerally, the value of benefits such as dis-ble fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other
exclusion applies to discounts on property orcounts at company cafeterias, cab fares homecompensation) of Form W–2. The total value of
services offered to customers in the ordinarywhen working overtime, and company picnicsyour fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.
course of the line of business in which you work.are not included in your income. Also see Em-The value of your fringe benefits may be added
However, it does not apply to discounts on realployee Discounts, later.to your other compensation on one Form W–2,
property or property commonly held for invest-or you may receive a separate Form W–2 show-
ment (such as stocks or bonds). The exclusion isHoliday gifts.If your employer gives you aing just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1
limited to the price charged nonemployee cus-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atwith a notation in box 12.
tomers multiplied by the following percentage.Christmas or other holidays, you do not have to
include the value of the gift in your income.• For a discount on property, yourAccident or Health Plan However, if your employer gives you cash, a giftemployer’s gross profit percentage (grosscertificate, or a similar item that you can easilyprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop-Generally, the value of accident or health planexchange for cash, you include the value of thaterty sold during the employer’s previouscoverage provided to you by your employer isgift as extra salary or wages regardless of thetax year. (Ask your employer for this per-not included in your income. Benefits you re-amount involved. centage.)ceive from the plan are generally taxable, as
explained, later, under Sickness and Injury Ben- • For a discount on services, 20%.efits. Dependent Care Benefits
If your employer provides dependent care bene-Financial Counseling FeesLong-term care coverage. Contributions by
fits under a qualified plan, you may be able toyour employer to provide coverage for long-term
 Financial counseling fees paid for you by yourexclude these benefits from your income. De-care services are generally not included in your
employer are included in your income and mustpendent care benefits include:income. However, contributions made through a
be reported as part of wages. If the fees are forflexible spending or similar arrangement (such
• Amounts your employer pays directly totax or investment counseling, they can be de-as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your
either you or your care provider for theducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-income. This amount will be reported as wages
care of your qualifying person while youlaneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit).in box 1 of your Form W–2.
work, and
Note. Beginning in 2002, qualified retire-Archer MSA contributions.Contributions by • The fair market value of care in a day-carement planning services paid for you by youryour employer to your Archer MSA (previouslyfacility provided or sponsored by your em-employer under a qualified plan will not be in-called a medical savings account) are not in-ployer. cluded in your income. For more information,cluded in your income. Their total will be re-
see Publication 553, Highlights of 2001 Taxported in box 12 of Form W–2 with code R. You The amount you can exclude is limited to the
Changes.must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer lesser of:
MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
• The total amount of dependent care bene-tracts, and attach the form to your return.
Group-Term Life Insurancefits you received during the year,
• The total amount of qualified expenses  Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofAdoption Assistance you incurred during the year, group-term life insurance coverage provided to
you by your employer (or former employer) is notYou may be able to exclude from your income• Your earned income,
included in your income. However, you mustamounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
• Your spouse’s earned income, or include in income the cost of employer-providedployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000nection with your adoption of an eligible child.• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-
See Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption, of coverage reduced by any amount you payrately).
for more information. toward the purchase of the insurance.
Adoption benefits are reported by your em- For exceptions to this rule, see Entire costYour employer must show the total amount of
ployer in box 12 of Form W–2 with code T. They excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.dependent care benefits provided to you during
are also included as social security and Medi-the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourIf your employer provided more than $50,000care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areForm W –2. Your employer will also include anyof coverage, the amount included in your in-not included as wages in box 1. To determinedependent care benefits over $5,000 in yourcome is reported as part of your wages in box 1the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustwages shown in box 1 of your Form W–2. of your Form W–2. It is also shown separately incomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop- box 12 with code C.To claim the exclusion, you must completetion Expenses. Attach the form to your return.either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-
dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2Group-term life insurance.This insurance is
(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-term life insurance protection (insurance for aAthletic Facilities penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use fixed period of time) that:
Form 1040EZ.)If your employer provides you with the free or • Provides a general death benefit,See the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-low-cost use of an employer-owned gym or
• Is provided to a group of employees,ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.other athletic club at your workplace, the value is
Page 4

Page 5 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is provided under a policy carried by the dollar, the amount you would otherwise includeEntire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire
employer, and cost of group-term life insurance if either of thein your income. However, you cannot reduce the
following circumstances apply.amount to include in your income by:• Provides an amount of insurance to each
employee based on a formula that pre- • The insurance is provided by your em-• Payments for coverage in a different taxvents individual selection. ployer through a qualified employees’year, trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified
Permanent benefits.If your group-term life• Payments for coverage through a cafeteria annuity plan.
insurance policy includes permanent benefits,plan, unless the payments are after-tax• You are a key employee and yoursuch as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youcontributions, or employer’s plan discriminates in favor ofmust include in your income, as wages, the cost key employees.• Payments for coverage not taxed to youof the permanent benefits minus the amount you
because of the exceptions discussed laterpay for them. Your employer should be able to
under Entire cost excluded.tell you the amount to include in your income. Meals and Lodging
Accidental death benefits.Insurance that   You do not include in your income the value ofExample. You are 51 years old and work forprovides accidental or other death benefits but meals and lodging provided to you and youremployers A and B. Both employers providedoes not provide general death benefits (travel family by your employer at no charge if thegroup-term life insurance coverage for you forinsurance, for example) is not group-term life following conditions are met.the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withinsurance.
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You1) The meals are:
Former employer. If your former employerpay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
a) Furnished on the business premises ofprovides more than $50,000 of group-term lifeployer B group plan. You figure the amount to
your employer, andinsurance coverage during the year, the amountinclude in your income as follows:
included in your income is reported as wages in b) Furnished for the convenience of yourbox 1 of Form W–2. It is also shown separatelyEmployer A coverage (in thousands) . . $ 35 employer.in box 12 with code C. Box 12 will also show theEmployer B coverage (in thousands) . . + 45
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-Total coverage (in thousands)...... $  8 0 2) The lodging is:care taxes on the excess coverage, with codesMinus: Exclusion (in thousands)..... − 50
Excess amount (in thousands)...... $  3 0M and N. You must pay these taxes with your a) Furnished on the business premises of
Multiply by cost per $1,000 per month,income tax return. Include them in your total tax your employer,
age 51 (from table).............. × .23on line 58, Form 1040, and enter “UT ” and the b) Furnished for the convenience of yourCost of excess insurance for 1 month $ 6.90amount of the taxes on the dotted line next to employer, andMultiply by number of full monthsline 58.
coverage at this cost............ × 12 c) A condition of your employment (youCost of excess insurance for tax year $82.80Two or more employers. Your exclusion for must accept it in order to be able toMinus: Premiums you paid........ −49.80employer-provided group-term life insurance properly perform your duties).Cost to include in income as wages$33.00coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by You also do not include in your income theThe total amount to include in income for thea single employer or multiple employers. If two value of meals or meal money that qualifies as acost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.or more employers provide insurance coverage de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-Because neither employer provided overthat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- mal) Benefits, earlier.$50,000 insurance coverage, the wages shownported as wages on your Forms W–2 will not be
on your Forms W–2 do not include any part ofFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of ancorrect. You must figure how much to include in
educational institution or an academic healththat $33. You must add it to the wages shown onyour income. Reduce the amount you figure by
center and you are provided with lodging thatyour Forms W–2 and include the total on yourany amount reported with code C in box 12 of
does not meet the three conditions above, youreturn.your Forms W–2, add the result to the wages
still may not have to include the value of thereported in box 1, and report the total on your
lodging in income. However, the lodging mustreturn. Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed onbe qualified campus lodging, and you must payFiguring the taxable cost.You figure the the cost of group-term life insurance if any of thean adequate rent.taxable cost for each month of coverage byfollowing circumstances apply.
Academic health center.This is an organi-multiplying the number of thousands of dollars of
zation that meets the following conditions.insurance coverage for the month (figured to the1) You are permanently and totally disabled
nearest tenth), less 50, by the cost from theand have ended your employment. • Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
following table. Use your age on the last day of vide medical or hospital care or medical2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-the tax year. You must prorate the cost from the education or research.icy for the entire period the insurance is intable if less than a full month of coverage is
• It receives payments for graduate medicalforce during the tax year.involved.
education under the Social Security Act.3) A charitable organization to which contri-COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTION • One of its principal purposes or functionsbutions are deductible is the only benefi-FOR ONE MONTH is to provide and teach basic and clinicalciary of the policy for the entire period the
medical science and research using itsinsurance is in force during the tax year.Age Cost own faculty.(You are not entitled to a deduction for aUnder 25 ..................... $  . 0 5
25 through 29..................  . 0 6 charitable contribution for naming a chari-Qualified campus lodging.Qualified cam-30 through 34.................. . 0 8 table organization as the beneficiary ofpus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your35 through 39.................. . 0 9 your policy.) spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on40 through 44.................. . 1 0
behalf of, the institution or center for use as a4) The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:45 through 49.................. . 1 5
home. The lodging must be located on or near a50 through 54.................. . 2 3 a) You retired before January 2, 1984,campus of the educational institution or aca-55 through 59.................. . 4 3
and were covered by the plan when demic health center.60 through 64.................. . 6 6
you retired, or65 through 69.................. 1.27 Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay70 and older................... 2.06 b) You reached age 55 before January 2,for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-
1984, and were employed by the em-If you pay any part of the cost of the insur- sidered adequate if it is at least equal to the
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for ployer or its predecessor in 1983. lesser of:
Page 5

Page 6 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You work as an engineer and• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-1) 5% of the appraised value of the lodging, your employer provides you with a subscriptionhicle (such as a van) between your homeor to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofand work place, the subscription is not included in your income2) The average of rentals paid by individuals
• A transit pass, or since the cost would have been deductible to(other than employees or students) for
you if you had paid for the subscription yourself.comparable lodging held for rent by the• Qualified parking.
educational institution.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for these
If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of Valuation of Fringe Benefitsexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-
these amounts, you must include the differencerangement is also excludable. However, cashin your income. If a fringe benefit is included in your income, thereimbursement for a transit pass is excludable
amount included is generally its value deter-The lodging must be appraised by an inde-only if a voucher or similar item that can bemined under the general valuation rule orpendent appraiser and the appraisal must beexchanged only for a transit pass is not readilyunder the special valuation rules. For an ex-reviewed on an annual basis. available for direct distribution to you.ception, see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.
Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuterGeneral valuation rule.You must include insor for State University, rents a home from thehighway vehicle transportation and transit passyour income the amount by which the fair marketuniversity that is qualified campus lodging. Thefringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofvalue of the fringe benefit is more than the sumhouse is appraised at $100,000. The average$65 a month, regardless of the total value ofof:rent paid for comparable university lodging byboth benefits.
persons other than employees or students isThe exclusion for the qualified parking fringe1) The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent ofbenefit cannot be more than $180 a month, fit, plus$5,500. Carl does not include in his income anyregardless of its value.rental value since the rent he pays equals at 2) The amount, if any, specifically excludedIf the benefits have a value that is more thanleast 5% of the appraised value of the house from your income by law.these limits, the excess must be included in your(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annualincome. If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,rent of only $4,000, he would have to include
no amount is included in your income.$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high- Fair market value.The fair market value ofway vehicle that seats at least six adults (nota fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andincluding the driver). At least 80% of theMoving Expense Reimbursements circumstances. It is the amount you would havevehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expectedto pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.Generally, if your employer pays for your movingto be: This is determined without regard to:expenses (either directly or indirectly) and the
• For transporting employees between theirexpenses would have been deductible if you • Your perceived value of the benefit, orhomes and work place, andpaid them yourself, the value is not included in • The amount your employer paid for theyour income. Get Publication 521 for more infor-• On trips during which employees occupy benefit.mation. at least half of the vehicle’s adult seating
capacity (not including the driver). Employer-provided vehicles.If your em-
ployer provides a car (or other highway motorNo-Additional-Cost Services
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car isTransit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-
The value of services you receive from your usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person
employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced priceto ride mass transit (whether public or private)Under the general valuation rules, the value
is not included in your income if your employer:free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuterof an employer-provided vehicle is the amount
highway vehicle operated by a person in theyou would have to pay a third party to lease the• Offers the same service for sale to cus-business of transporting persons for compensa-same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-tomers in the ordinary course of the line oftion. rable terms in the same geographic area wherebusiness in which you work, and you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-
• Does not have a substantial additional ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicleQualified parking.This is parking provided to
cost (including any sales income given up) is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-an employee at or near the employer’s place of
to provide you with the service (regardless riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-business. It also includes parking provided on or
of what you paid for the service). plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofnear a location from which the employee com-
miles driven unless you prove the vehicle couldmutes to work in a commuter highway vehicle or
Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex- have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.carpool. It does not include parking at or near
cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, orthe employee’s home. Flights on employer-provided aircraft.train tickets; hotel rooms; or telephone services. Under the general valuation rules, if your flight
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-Example. You are employed as a flight at-Tuition Reduction marily personal and you control the use of thetendant for a company that owns both an airline aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itYou can exclude a qualified tuition reductionand a hotel chain. Your employer allows you to would cost to charter the flight from a third party.from your income. This is the amount of a reduc-take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied
If there is more than one employee on thetion in tuition for education (below graduateseat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must belevel) furnished by an educational institution tois an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The
divided among those employees. The divisionan employee (or former employee) or his or hervalue of the personal flight is not included in your
must be based on all the facts, including whichfamily. For more information, get Publicationincome. However, the value of the hotel room is
employee or employees control the use of the520.included in your income because you do not
aircraft.work in the hotel business.
Special valuation rules.You generally canWorking Condition Benefits
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitTransportation
If your employer provides you with a product or only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-
ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotservice and the cost of it would have been de-If your employer provides you with a qualified
use a different special rule to value that benefit.ductible as a business expense or depreciationtransportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded
You can always use the general valuation ruleif you paid for it yourself, the cost is not includedfrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualified
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-in your income.transportation fringe benefit is:
Page 6

Page 7 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stances, even if your employer uses a special Elective deferrals include elective contribu- amount you can defer in tax-sheltered annuities
rule. under the special limit discussed next.tions to the following retirement plans.
If you and your employer use a special valua- Under new law, beginning in 2002, the• Cash or deferred arrangements (sectiontion rule, you must include in your income the special limit on elective deferrals for401(k) plans).amount your employer determines under the section 457 plans no longer applies.CAUTION
!
special rule minus the sum of: • Section 457 plans. Deferrals under these plans are subject to the
general limit for elective deferrals ($11,000 for• The Thrift Savings Plan for federal em-1) Any amount you repaid your employer, 2002). The special catch-up limit in the last 3ployees.plus years before retirement is twice the general limit
• Salary reduction simplified employee pen-2) Any amount specifically excluded from in- amount (twice $11,000 for 2002, or $22,000).
sion plans (SARSEP).come by law. Also, beginning in 2002, deferrals under section
457 plans are no longer coordinated with other• Simple retirement account (SIMPLE)The special valuation rules are the following. plans in applying the deferral limit.plans.
1) The automobile lease rule. • Tax-sheltered annuities. Special limit for tax-sheltered annuities.
2) The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. If you are a participant in a tax-sheltered annuity• Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-
plan with at least 15 years of service at an3) The commuting rule. porting by employer, later.)
educational organization, a hospital, a home
4) The unsafe conditions commuting rule. health service agency, a health and welfare ser-
Limit on deferrals.For 2001, you generallyvice agency, a church, or a convention or asso-5) The employer-operated eating-facility rule.should not have deferred more than a total ofciation of churches (or associated organization),
For more information on these rules, see$10,500 for all qualified plans by which you arethe limit on elective deferrals to the plan is the
Publication 15–B, Employer’s Tax Guide to covered. This amount may be further limited ifgeneral limit ($10,500 for 2001) plus the lesser
Fringe Benefits. you are a highly compensated employee. Theof the following amounts.
amount deferred by a highly compensated em-For information on the non-commercial flight
1) $3,000.and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec- ployee as a percentage of pay can be no more
tions 1.61–21(g) and 1.61–21(h) of the regula-than 125% of the average deferral percentage2) $15,000, reduced by elective deferrals ex-tions. (ADP) of all eligible nonhighly compensated em-ceeding the basic amount that you were
ployees. Your employer or plan administratorallowed in earlier years because of this
can probably tell you the amount of the deferralRetirement Plan years-of-service rule.
limit under this ADP test and whether it appliesContributions 3) $5,000 times the number of your years ofto you.
service for the organization, minus the to-Your employer or plan administrator should Generally, you must include in income amounts tal elective deferrals under the plan forapply the proper annual limit when figuring youryou pay into a retirement plan through payroll earlier years.plan contributions. However, you are responsi-deductions. You recover your contributions tax
free when you retire and receive benefits fromble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure
Reporting by employer.Your employer gen-the plan. See Publication 575 for informationthat the limit is not exceeded.
erally should not include elective deferrals inabout the tax treatment of retirement plan bene-Under new law, the general limit onyour wages in box 1 of Form W–2. Instead, yourfits. elective deferrals for 2002 is $11,000.employer should mark the Retirement plan
This amount will increase by $1,000checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount
CAUTION
!
Employer’s contributions to qualified plan.each year until it reaches $15,000 in 2006. Indeferred in box 12.Your employer’s contributions to a qualified re-
addition, beginning in 2002, you generally cantirement plan for you are not included in income Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.make an additional elective deferral if you areat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W –2age 50 or older. For more information, see Publi-you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) should not have been reduced for contributionscation 553, Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.However, the cost of life insurance coverage you made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirementincluded in the plan may have to be included. plan. The amount you contributed should beSpecial limit for deferrals under SIMPLESee Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, under identified with code “H ” in box 12. You mayplans. If you are a participant in a SIMPLEFringe Benefits. deduct the amount deferred subject to the limitsplan, you generally should not have deferredthat apply. Include your deduction in the total onmore than $6,500 in 2001. Amounts you deferEmployer ’s contributions to nonqualified line 32 (Form 1040). Enter the amount andunder a SIMPLE plan count toward the generalplan. If your employer pays into a nonqualified “501(c)(18)” on the dotted line next to line 32.limit ($10,500 for 2001) and may affect theplan for you, you generally must include the
amount you can defer under other electivecontributions in your income as wages for the Excess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed the
tax year in which the contributions are made. deferral plans. annual limit, you must notify your plan by the
However, if your interest in the plan is subject to date required by the plan. If the plan permits, theUnder new law, the special limit ona substantial risk of forfeiture (you have a good excess amount will be distributed to you. If youelective deferrals for SIMPLE plans forchance of losing it) at the time of the contribu- participate in more than one plan, you can have2002 is $7,000. This amount will in-CAUTION
!
tion, you do not have to include the value of your the excess paid out of any of the plans thatcrease by $1,000 each year until it reachesinterest in your income until it is no longer sub- permit these distributions. You must notify each$10,000 in 2005.ject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. plan by the date required by that plan of the
amount to be paid from that particular plan. TheSpecial limit for deferrals under section
plan must then pay you the amount of the ex-457 plans. If you are a participant in a sectionElective Deferrals cess, along with any income earned on that457 plan (a deferred compensation plan for em-
amount, by April 15 of the following year.ployees of state or local governments or tax-ex-If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement You must include the excess deferral in yourempt organizations), you should generally haveplans, you can choose to have part of your income for the year of the deferral. File Formdeferred no more than 1/3 of your compensation,compensation contributed by your employer to a 1040 to add the excess deferral amount to yourup to $8,500 in 2001. Your plan may also allow aretirement fund, rather than have it paid to you. wages on line 7. Do not use Form 1040A orspecial catch-up limit of up to $15,000 for eachThe amount you set aside (called an elective Form 1040EZ to report excess deferralof your last 3 years of service before reachingdeferral) is treated as an employer contribution amounts.normal retirement age. Amounts you deferto a qualified plan. It is not included in wages
under other elective deferral plans may affectsubject to income tax at the time contributed. Excess not distributed.If you do not take
your limits under section 457 plans. AmountsHowever, it is included in wages subject to social out the excess amount, you cannot include it in
security and Medicare taxes. you defer under section 457 plans may affect the the cost of the contract even though you in-
Page 7

Page 8 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are in the year paid. A corrective payment consistingExcess Contributions
of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.taxed twice on the excess deferral left in the
If you are a highly compensated employee, theIf you received a corrective payment of ex-plan— once when you contribute it, and againtotal of your elective deferrals and other contri-cess annual additions, you should receive awhen you receive it as a distribution. butions made for you for any year under a sec-separate Form 1099–R for the year of the pay-Excess distributed to you.If you take out tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as ament with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalpercentage of pay, no more than 125% of thethe excess after the year of the deferral and you payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099–R onaverage deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligiblereceive the corrective distribution by April 15 of line 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Formnonhighly compensated employees.the following year, do not include it in income 1040A. Report the taxable amount shown in boxIf the total contributed to the plan is moreagain in the year you receive it. If you receive it 2a of Form 1099–R on line 16b of Form 1040 orthan the amount allowed under the ADP test, thelater, you must include it in income in both the line 12b of Form 1040A.excess contributions must be either distributedyear of the deferral and the year you receive it.to you or recharacterized as after-tax employee Even though a corrective distribution ofAny income on the excess deferral taken out iscontributions by treating them as distributed toexcess annual additions is reported on
taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Ifyou and then contributed by you to the plan. YouForm 1099 –R, it is not otherwise
TIP
you take out part of the excess deferral and themust include the excess contributions in yourtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot
income on it, allocate the distribution proportion-income as wages on line 7 of Form 1040. Yoube rolled over into another plan, and it is not
cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ toately between the excess deferral and the in- subject to the additional tax on early distribu-
report excess contribution amounts. tions.come.
If you receive excess contributions from aYou should receive a Form 1099–R, Distri- 401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-butions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement Stock Optionstributions within 21/2 months after the close of theor Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-plan year, you must include them in your incomeIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or selltracts, etc., for the year in which the excessin the year of the contribution. If you receivestock or other property as payment for yourdeferral is distributed to you. Use the followingthem later, or receive less than $100 excessservices, you will usually have income eitherrules to report a corrective distribution shown oncontributions, include the excess contributionswhen you receive the option or when you exer-Form 1099–R for 2001. and earnings in your income in the year distrib-
cise the option (use it to buy or sell the stock oruted. If the excess contributions are recharacter-
other property). However, if your option is a• If the distribution was for a 2001 excess ized, you must include them in income in the
statutory stock option (defined later), you usuallydeferral, your Form 1099–R should have year a corrective distribution would have oc-
will not have any income until you sell or ex-curred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notifythe code “8” in box 7. Add the excess
change your stock. Your employer can tell youyou by March 15 following the year in whichdeferral amount to your wages on your
which kind of option you hold.excess contributions are made that you must2001 tax return.
withdraw the excess and earnings. You must
• If the distribution was for a 2000 excess include the excess contributions in your income
Nonstatutory Stock Optionsdeferral, your Form 1099–R should have in the year of the contribution (or the year of the
the code “P” in box 7. If you did not addnotification if less than $100) and include theIf you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,earnings in your income in the year withdrawn.the excess deferral amount to your wages the amount of income to include and the time toYou should receive a Form 1099–R for theon your 2000 tax return, you must file an include it depend on whether the fair marketyear in which the excess contributions are dis-amended return on Form 1040X. If you did value of the option can be readily determined.tributed to you (or are recharacterized). Addnot receive the distribution by April 16, The fair market value of an option can be readilyexcess contributions or earnings shown on2001, you must also add it to your wages determined if it is actively traded on an estab-Form 1099–R for 2001 to your wages on youron your 2001 tax return. lished market.2001 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”
The fair market value of an option that is not• If the distribution was for a 1999 excess or “D ” is in box 7, you may have to file an
traded on an established market can be readilyamended 2000 or 1999 return on Form 1040X todeferral, your Form 1099–R should have
determined only if all of the following conditionsadd the excess contributions or earnings to yourthe code “D ” in box 7. If you did not add
exist.wages in the year of the contribution.the excess deferral amount to your wages
on your 1999 tax return, you must file an Even though a corrective distribution of• You can transfer the option.
amended return on Form 1040X. You excess contributions is reported on• You can exercise the option immediatelyForm 1099 –R, it is not otherwisemust also add it to your wages on your
TIP
in full.treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot2001 income tax return.
be rolled over into another plan, and it is not• The option or the property subject to the• If the distribution was for the income subject to the additional tax on early distribu-option is not subject to any condition or
earned on an excess deferral, your Formtions. restriction (other than a condition to se-
1099–R should have the code “8” in box cure payment of the purchase price) that
7. Add the income amount to your wages has a significant effect on the fair market
on your 2001 income tax return, regard- value of the option.Excess Annual Additions
less of when the excess deferral was • The fair market value of the option privi-The amount contributed in 2001 to a definedmade. lege can be readily determined.contribution plan is generally limited to theReport a loss on a corrective distribution of The option privilege for an option to buy is thelesser of 25% of your compensation or $35,000.an excess deferral in the year the excess opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-Under certain circumstances, contributions that
amount (reduced by the loss) is distributed toexceed these limits (excess annual additions)cise period from any increase in the value of
you. Include the loss as a negative amount onmay be corrected by a distribution of your elec-property subject to the option without risking any
line 21 (Form 1040) and identify it as “Loss on tive deferrals or a return of your after-tax contri-capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-
butions and earnings from these contributions.Excess Deferral Distribution.” riod the fair market value of stock subject to an
option is greater than the option’s exercise price,Under new law, the dollar limit on con-Even though a corrective distribution of a profit may be realized by exercising the optiontributions to a defined contribution planexcess deferrals is reported on Form and immediately selling the stock at its higherfor 2002 is $40,000.CAUTION
!
1099–R, it is not otherwise treated as value. The option privilege for an option to sell is
TIP
a distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled the opportunity to benefit during the exerciseA corrective payment of excess annual addi-
over into another plan, and it is not subject to the period from a decrease in the value of the prop-tions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings
additional tax on early distributions. erty subject to the option.from your after-tax contributions is fully taxable
Page 8

Page 9 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Option with readily determined value.If you • You meet the holding period requirement the stock was selling on the open market for $14
receive a nonstatutory stock option that has abut the option was granted under an em-a share, your rights to the stock first became
readily determined fair market value at the time itployee stock purchase plan for an optiontransferable. You include $400 ($1,400 value
is granted to you, the option is treated like otherprice that was less than the stock’s fair when your rights first became transferable mi-
property received as compensation. See Re- market value at that time. nus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment on
stricted Property, later, for rules on how much line 10 of Form 6251.Report your ordinary income as wages on line 7,income to include and when to include it. How-Form 1040, for the year of the sale.ever, the rule described in that discussion for
Employee stock purchase plan.If you soldchoosing to include the value of property in yourIncentive stock options (ISOs).If you sellstock acquired by exercising an option grantedincome for the year of the transfer does notstock acquired by exercising an ISO and meetapply to a nonstatutory option. under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-the holding period requirement, your gain or lossmine your ordinary income and your capital gainfrom the sale is capital gain or loss.Option without readily determined value.If or loss as follows.If you do not meet the holding period require-the fair market value of the option is not readily
Option granted at discount.If you meetdetermined at the time it is granted to you (evenment and you have a gain from the sale, the gain
the holding period requirement and you have aif it is determined later), you do not have incomeis ordinary income up to the amount by which
gain from the sale, the gain is ordinary incomeuntil you transfer or exercise the option. Whenthe stock’s fair market value when you exercised
you exercise this kind of option, the restricted up to the amount by which the stock’s fair marketthe option exceeded the option price. Any ex-
property rules apply to the property received. value when the option was granted exceededcess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from
The amount to include in your income is thethe sale, it is a capital loss and you do not havethe option price. Any excess gain is capital gain.
difference between the amount you pay for theany ordinary income. If you have a loss from the sale, it is a capital
property and its fair market value when it be- loss, and you do not have any ordinary income.comes substantially vested. Your basis in theExample. Your employer, X Corporation,
property you acquire under the option is thegranted you an ISO on March 11, 1999, to buyExample. Your employer, Y Corporation,
amount you pay for it plus any amount you must100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 agranted you an option under its employee stockinclude in your gross income under this rule. Forshare, its fair market value at the time. Youpurchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Ymore information on restricted property, see Re- exercised the option on January 19, 2000, whenCorporation for $20 a share at a time when thestricted Property, later. the stock was selling on the open market for $12stock had a value of $22 a share. EighteenIf you transferred this kind of option in ana share. On January 25, 2001, you sold themonths later, when the value of the stock wasarm’s-length transaction, you must include instock for $15 a share. Although you held the$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14your income the money or other property youstock for more than a year, less than 2 years hadmonths after that you sold your stock for $30 areceived for the transfer, as if you had exercisedpassed from the time you were granted the op-share. In the year of sale, you must report asthe option. tion. In 2001, you must report the differencewages the difference between the option pricebetween the option price ($10) and the value of($20) and the value at the time the option wasthe stock when you exercised the option ($12)Statutory Stock Options granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8) isas wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain,capital gain, figured as follows:figured as follows:There are two kinds of statutory stock options.
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and Selling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $ 3,0001,500• Options granted under employee stock Purchase price (option price)Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000purchase plans. ($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000Gain ....................... $  5 0 0 Gain ...................... $Amount reported as wagesFor either kind of option, you must be an 1,000[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200employee of the company granting the option, or Amount reported as wages
a related company, at all times beginning withAmount reported as capital gain $ 300 [($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200
the date the option is granted, until 3 months Amount reported as capital gain $ 800Alternative minimum tax (AMT).For thebefore you exercise the option (for an incentive
stock option, 1 year before if you are disabled). AMT, you must treat stock acquired through theHolding period requirement not met.IfAlso, the option must be nontransferable exceptexercise of an ISO as if no special treatmentyou do not meet the holding period requirement,at death. If you do not meet the employmentapplied. This means that, when your rights in theyour ordinary income is the amount by which therequirements, or you receive a transferable op-stock are transferable and no longer subject to astock’s fair market value when you exercised thetion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option.substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include asoption exceeded the option price. This ordinarySee Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in thisan adjustment in figuring alternative minimum
income is not limited to your gain from the salediscussion. taxable income the amount by which the fair
of the stock. Increase your basis in the stock byIf you receive a statutory stock option, do notmarket value of the stock exceeds the option
the amount of this ordinary income. The differ-include any amount in your income either whenprice. Enter this adjustment on line 10 of Form
the option is granted or when you exercise it. ence between your increased basis and the sell-6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— Individuals.
You have taxable income or deductible loss ing price of the stock is a capital gain or loss.Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac-
when you sell the stock that you bought byquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the
exercising the option. Your income or loss is the Example. The facts are the same as in theadjustment. However, no adjustment is required
difference between the amount you paid for the previous example, except that you sold theif you dispose of the stock in the same year you
stock (the option price) and the amount you stock only 6 months after you exercised theexercise the option.
receive when you sell it. You generally treat this option. Because you did not hold the stock longSee Restricted Property, later, for more infor-amount as capital gain or loss and report it on enough, you must report $300 as wages andmation.Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows:Your AMT basis in stock acquiredLosses, for the year of the sale.
through an ISO is likely to differ fromHowever, you may have ordinary income for Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000your regular tax basis. Therefore, keepthe year that you sell the stock in either of theRECORDS
Purchase price (option price)
adequate records for both the AMT and regularfollowing situations. ($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000
tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain orGain ...................... $1,000• You do not meet the holding period re- loss. Amount reported as wagesquirement. This situation applies only if [($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300you sell the stock within 1 year after its
Example. The facts are the same as in thetransfer to you or within 2 years after the Amount reported as capital gain
previous example. On January 19, 2001, when [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700option was granted.
Page 9

Page 10 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stock you chose to include in your in-share (regardless of its value) if you do notRestricted Property
come. Dividends you receive on restrictedperform the services, your rights to the stock are
stock you chose to include in your income in thesubject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.Generally, if you receive property for your ser-
year transferred are treated the same as anyvices, you must include its fair market value in
other dividends. You should receive a Formyour income in the year you receive the prop-Choosing to include in income for year of
1099–DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-transfer.You can choose to include the value
clude the dividends in your wages on your re-erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsof the property at the time of transfer (minus any
turn. Report them as dividends.value, you do not include the value of the prop-amount you paid for the property) in your income
erty in your income until it has been substan- for the year it is transferred. If you make thisSale of property not substantially vested.tially vested. (You can choose to include thechoice, the substantial vesting rules do not applyThese rules apply to the sale or other dispositionvalue of the property in your income in the year itand, generally, any later appreciation in value isof property that you did not choose to include inis transferred to you, as discussed later, rathernot included in your compensation when theyour income in the year transferred and that isthan the year it is substantially vested.)property becomes substantially vested. Yournot substantially vested.Until the property becomes substantiallybasis for figuring gain or loss when you sell theIf you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-vested, it is owned by the person who makes theproperty is the amount you paid for it plus theerty in an arm’s-length transaction, include intransfer to you, usually your employer. However,amount you included in income as compensa-your income as compensation for the year ofany income from the property, or the right to usetion. sale the amount realized minus the amount youthe property, is included in your income as paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-If you make this choice, you cannotwages in the year you receive the income or erty in an arm’s-length transaction for otherrevoke it without the consent of thehave the right to use the property. property that is not substantially vested, treat theInternal Revenue Service. Consent willCAUTION
!
When the property becomes substantially new property as if it were substituted for thebe given only if you were under a mistake of factvested, you must include its fair market value, exchanged property.as to the underlying transaction.minus any amount you paid for it, in your income If you sell the property in a transaction that isfor that year. If you forfeit the property after you have in-not at arm’s length, include in your income as
cluded its value in income, your loss is thecompensation for the year of sale the total of anyExample. Your employer, the RST Corpo-amount you paid for the property minus anymoney you received and the fair market value ofration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 aamount you realized on the forfeiture. any substantially vested property you receivedshare. At the time of the sale the fair market on the sale. In addition, you will have to reportHow to make the choice. You make thevalue of the stock is $100 a share. Under the income when the original property becomeschoice by filing a written statement with the Inter-terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial substantially vested, as if you still held it. Reportnal Revenue Service center where you file yourrisk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of as compensation its fair market value minus thereturn. You must file this statement no later thanlosing it) for a 5-year period. Because your stock total of the amount you paid for the property and30 days after the date the property was trans-is not substantially vested when it is transferred, the amount included in your income from theferred. A copy of the statement must be attachedyou do not include any amount in your income in earlier sale.to your tax return for the year the property wasthe year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year
transferred. You also must give a copy of thisperiod, the fair market value of the stock is $200 Example. In 1998, you paid your employerstatement to the person for whom you per-a share. You must include $19,000 in your in- $50 for a share of stock that had a fair marketformed the services and, if someone other thancome [100 shares × ($200 fair market value − value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilyou received the property, to that person.$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor- 2001. In 2000, you sold the stock to your spouseYou must sign the statement and indicate onporation on your 100 shares of stock are taxable for $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. Youit that you are making the choice under sectionto you as wages during the period the stock can had wage income of $10 from this transaction. In83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-be forfeited. 2001, when the stock had a fair market value ofment must contain all of the following informa-$120, it became substantially vested. For 2001,Substantially vested.Property is substan-tion. you must report additional wage income of $60,tially vested when:
figured as follows:• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-• It is transferable, or cation number. Fair market value of stock at time• It is not subject to a substantial risk of• A description of each property for whichof substantial vesting........ $120forfeiture (you do not have a good chanceyou are making the choice. Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50of losing it). Minus: Compensation previously• The date or dates on which the propertyincluded in income from sale toTransferable property.Property is trans- was transferred and the tax year for whichspouse.................. 1 0 −60ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge youryou are making the choice. Additional income $60interest in the property to any person (other than• The nature of any restrictions on the prop-the transferor), and if the person receiving your Inherited property not substantially vested.erty.interest in the property is not required to give up If you inherit property not substantially vested atthe property, or its value, if the substantial risk of• The fair market value at the time of trans-the time of the decedent’s death, any incomeforfeiture occurs. fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatyou receive from the property is considered in-will never lapse) of each property forcome in respect of a decedent and is taxedSubstantial risk of forfeiture.A substan- which you are making the choice. according to the rules for restricted propertytial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the
received for services. For information about in-property transferred depend on the future per-• Any amount that you paid for the property.
come in respect of a decedent, get Publicationformance (or refraining from performance) of• A statement that you have provided copies559.substantial services by any person, or the occur-to the appropriate persons.rence of a certain condition related to the trans-
fer.
Dividends received on restricted stock.
Dividends you receive on restricted stock areExample. The Spin Corporation transfers to
Special Rules for
extra compensation to you. Your employeryou as compensation for services 100 shares of
should include these payments on your Formits corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the Certain Employees
W –2. If they are also reported on a Formterms of the transfer, you must resell the stock to
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, youthe corporation at $100 a share if you leave your This part of the publication deals with special
should list them on Schedule B (Form 1040),job for any reason within 3 years from the date of rules for people in certain types of employment:
Interest and Ordinary Dividends, with a state-transfer. Because you must perform substantial members of the clergy, members of religious
ment that you have included them as wages. Doservices over a period of time and you must orders, people working for foreign employers,
not include them in the total dividends received.resell the stock to the corporation at $100 a military personnel, and volunteers.
Page 10

Page 11 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Homeowner. If you own your home or are to establish and maintain a unified pension sys-Clergy
buying it, you can exclude your housing allow- tem for all retired clergy members of the denomi-
ance from your income if you spend it for thenation for their past services to the localIf you are a member of the clergy, you must
down payment on the home, for mortgage pay- churches.include in your income offerings and fees you
ments, or for interest, taxes, utilities, repairs, etc.receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, A surviving spouse of a retired minister can-
However, you cannot exclude more than the fairmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the not exclude a housing allowance from income. If
rental value of the home plus the cost of utilities,offering is made to the religious institution, it is these payments were reported to you on Form
even if a larger amount is designated as a hous-not taxable to you. 1099–R, include them on lines 16a and 16b of
ing allowance. The fair rental value of a homeForm 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of FormIf you are a member of a religious organiza-
includes the fair rental value of the furnishings in1040A. Otherwise, include them on line 21 oftion and you give your outside earnings to the
it. Form 1040.organization, you still must include the earnings
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)in your income. However, you may be entitled to
the qualified mortgage interest and real estatea charitable contribution deduction for the Members of Religious Orderstaxes you pay on your home even if you useamount paid to the organization. Get Publication
nontaxable housing allowance funds to make If you are a member of a religious order who has526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see Mem-
the payments. taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsbers of Religious Orders, later.
that you renounce and turn over to the orderTeachers or administrators.If you are a min-depends on whether your services are per-Pension. A pension or retirement pay for aister employed as a teacher or administrator byformed for the order.member of the clergy is usually treated as anya church school, college, or university, you are
other pension or annuity. It must be reported onperforming ministerial services for purposes ofServices performed for the order.If you arelines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or on lines 12athe housing exclusion. However, if you performperforming the services as an agent of the orderand 12b of Form 1040A. services as a teacher or administrator on thein the exercise of duties required by the order,faculty of a nonchurch college, you cannot ex-do not include in your income the amountsclude from your income a housing allowance orturned over to the order.Housing the value of a home that is provided to you.
If your order directs you to perform services
 Special rules for housing apply to members of If you live in faculty lodging as an em-for another agency of the supervising church or
the clergy. Under these rules, you do not includeployee of an educational institution oran associated institution, you are considered to
in your income the rental value of a home (in- academic health center, all or part of
TIP
be performing the services as an agent of the
cluding utilities) or a housing allowance providedthe value of that lodging may be nontaxableorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an
to you as part of your pay. The home or allow-under a different rule. See Faculty lodging in the order that you turn over to the order are not
ance must be provided as compensation fordiscussion on meals and lodging under Fringe included in your income.
your duties as an ordained, licensed, or commis-Benefits, earlier.
sioned minister. However, you must include the Example. You are a member of a churchIf you serve as a minister of music or ministerrental value of the home or the housing allow- order and have taken a vow of poverty. Youof education, or serve in an administrative orance as earnings from self-employment on renounce any claims to your earnings and turnother function of your religious organization, butSchedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment over to the order any salaries or wages youare not authorized to perform substantially all ofTax, if you are subject to the self-employment earn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderthe religious duties of an ordained minister intax. For more information, see Publication 517, assigns you to work in a hospital that is anyour church (even if you are commissioned as aSocial Security and Other Information for Mem- associated institution of the church. However,minister of the gospel), the housing exclusionbers of the Clergy and Religious Workers. you remain under the general direction and con-does not apply to you.
trol of the order. You are considered to be an
Housing allowance. The amount of a hous- Cantors. If you are a cantor, the housing ex-agent of the order and any wages you earn at
ing allowance you can exclude from your in-clusion applies to you even if you are not or-the hospital that you turn over to your order are
come cannot be more than either: dained, provided you have a bona fide not included in your income.
commission and are employed by a congrega-• The reasonable compensation for your tion on a full-time basis to perform substantiallyServices performed outside the order.Ifservices as a minister, or all religious functions. you are directed to work outside the order, your
services are not an exercise of duties required• Your expenses, in the year the allowanceTheological students.The housing exclusionby the order unless they meet both of the follow-is received, to provide a home or to paydoes not apply if you are a theological studenting requirements.utilities for a home you are provided.serving a required internship as an assistant
pastor unless you are ordained, commissioned,• They are the kind of services that are ordi-Expenses of providing a home include rent,or licensed as a minister. narily the duties of members of the order.house payments, furniture payments, costs for a
garage, and utilities. They do not include the • They are part of the duties that you mustTraveling evangelists.If you are an ordained
cost of food or servants. exercise for, or on behalf of, the religiousminister and are providing evangelistic services,
order as its agent.you can exclude amounts received fromDesignation requirement.The church or out-of-town churches that are designated as aorganization that employs you must officially If you are an employee of a third party, thehousing allowance, provided you actually usedesignate the payment as a housing allowance services you perform for the third party will notthem to maintain your permanent home.before the payment is made. A definite amount be considered directed or required of you by the
must be designated. The amount of the housing order. Amounts you receive for these servicesRetired members of the clergy.The rental
allowance cannot be determined at a later date. are included in your income, even if you havevalue of a home provided rent free by your
taken a vow of poverty.If you are employed and paid by a localchurch for your past services is not income if you
congregation, a resolution by a national churchare a retired minister. In addition, the amount of
Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of aagency of your denomination does not effec-your housing allowance that you spent for utili-
religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.tively designate a housing allowance for you.ties, maintenance, repairs, and similar ex-
He renounces all claims to his earnings andThe local congregation must officially designatepenses directly related to providing a home is
turns over his earnings to the order.the part of your salary that is to be a housingnot income to you. These amounts are also not
allowance. However, a resolution of a nationalincluded in net earnings from self-employment. Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed
church agency can designate your housing al-The general convention of a national relig- by the superiors of the order to get a job with a
lowance if you are directly employed by theious denomination can designate a housing al- private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-
agency. If no part has been officially designated,lowance for retired ministers that can beployee of the school, and, at his request, the
you must include your total salary in your in-excluded from income. This applies if the local school made the salary payments directly to the
come. congregations authorize the general convention order.
Page 11

Page 12 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Because Mark is an employee of the school, Pensions and other income do not qualify for this for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,
exemption. and clothing are exempt from tax.he is performing services for the school rather
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark Taxable allowances. The following al-Employment abroad. For information on theearns working for the school are included in his lowances must be included in your income andtax treatment of income earned abroad, getincome. reported as wages.Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad.Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of a • Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
children while you are a volunteer leaderreligious order who, as a condition of member-
training in the United States.ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.Military
All claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene • Living allowances designated by the Di-Payments you receive as a member of a militaryreceived permission from the order to establish rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-service generally are taxed as wages except fora private practice as a psychologist and coun- pensation. These are allowances forretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.sels members of religious orders as well as personal items such as domestic help,Allowances generally are not taxed. For morenonmembers. Although the order reviews laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-information on the tax treatment of military al-Gene ’s budget annually, Gene controls not only tainment and recreation, transportation,lowances and benefits, get Publication 3, Armedthe details of his practice but also the means by and other miscellaneous expenses.Forces’ Tax Guide.which his work as a psychologist is accom-
• Leave allowances.plished. Military retirement pay.If your retirement
Gene ’s private practice as a psychologist • Readjustment allowances or terminationpay is based on age or length of service, it is
does not make him an agent of the religious payments . These are considered re-taxable and must be included in your income as
order. The psychological services provided by ceived by you when credited to your ac-a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or
Gene are not the type of services that are pro- count.on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
vided by the order. The income Gene earns as ainclude in your income the amount of any reduc-
psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aExample. Gary Carpenter, a Peace CorpsGene must include in his income the earningssurvivor annuity for your spouse or childrenvolunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentfrom his private practice. under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-allowance during his period of service, to be paidtion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofForeign Employer For a more detailed discussion of survivorduty. Although the allowance is not available toannuities, get Publication 575. him until the end of his service, Gary must in-Special rules apply if you work for a foreign clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isDisability.If you are retired on disability,employer. credited to his account.see Military and Government Disability Pen-
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If
works in the United States for a foreign govern- you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includeVeterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-ment, an international organization, a foreign meal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourcome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,embassy, or any foreign employer, you must income as wages.regulation, or administrative practice adminis-include your salary in your income. tered by the Department of Veterans AffairsNational Senior Service Corps programs.(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orSocial security and Medicare taxes.You Do not include in your income amounts youtheir families are not taxable.are exempt from social security and Medicare receive for supportive services or reimburse-employee taxes if you are employed in the • Education, training, and subsistence al-ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-United States by an international organization orlowances. lowing programs.a foreign government. However, you must pay
• Disability compensation and pension pay-• Retired Senior Volunteer Programself-employment tax on your earnings from ser-
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-(RSVP).vices performed in the United States, even
ans or their families.though you are not self-employed. This rule also • Foster Grandparent Program.applies if you are an employee of a qualifying• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair• Senior Companion Program.wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-living.ernment.
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoService Corps of Retired Executiveslost their sight or the use of their limbs.Non-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. citizen, (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-
or if you are a U.S. citizen but also a citizen of• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-ive services or reimbursements for
the Philippines, and you work for an interna-dends paid either to veterans or their ben-out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not
tional organization in the United States, youreficiaries, including the proceeds of ainclude these amounts in gross income.
salary from that source is exempt from tax. If youveteran’s endowment policy paid before
Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include inwork for a foreign government in the United death.
your income any reimbursements you receiveStates, your salary from that source is exempt
• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-for transportation, meals, and other expensesfrom tax if your work is like the work done by
posit with the VA. you have in training for, or actually providing,employees of the United States in that foreign
volunteer federal income tax counseling for thecountry and the foreign government gives an
elderly (TCE).equal exemption to employees of the United Rehabilitative program payments.VA
You can deduct as a charitable contributionStates in that country. payments to hospital patients and resident vet-
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inerans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-Waiver of alien status.If you are an alien taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-tic or rehabilitative programs are not treated aswho works for a foreign government or interna- tance (VITA) program.nontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report thesetional organization and you file a waiver under
payments as income on line 21 of Form 1040.section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary
Volunteersyou receive after the date you file the waiver is Business andnot exempt under this rule. However, it may be
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aexempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi- Investment Incomevolunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarcation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more
agency is covered in the following discussions.information about treaties. This section provides information on the treat-
Nonwage income. This exemption appliesPeace Corps. Living allowances you receive ment of income from certain rents and royalties,
only to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-
Page 12

Page 13 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rations. For additional information about busi- and similar property, or from patents on inven-Partnership agreement. The partnership
ness and investment income, you may want totions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use agreement usually covers the distribution of
see the following publications. your work over a specified period of time. Royal- profits, losses, and other items. However, if the
ties are generally based on the number of units agreement does not state how a specific item of• Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a gain or loss will be shared, or the allocationness. performance, or machines sold. stated in the agreement does not have substan-
• Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop- tial economic effect, your distributive share is
erty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes). figured according to your interest in the partner-Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from
ship.oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount• Publication 541, Partnerships.
you receive when natural resources are ex-
• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi- Partnership return.Although a partnershiptracted from your property. The royalties are
tions of Assets. generally pays no tax, it must file an informationbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and
return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipare paid to you by a person or company who• Publication 550, Investment Income and Income. This shows the result of theleases the property from you.Expenses (Including Capital Gains and partnership’s operations for its tax year and theLosses). Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-items that must be passed through to the part-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasners.
wells, you can recover your investment throughRents From Personal Schedule K–1 (Form 1065). You shouldthe depletion allowance. For information on this
Property receive from each partnership in which you are asubject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.
member a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1065),
Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum-If you rent out personal property, such as equip- Partner’s Share of Income, Credits, Deductions,
stances, you can treat amounts you receivement or vehicles, how you report your income etc., showing your share of income, deductions,
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-and expenses is generally determined by: credits, and tax preference items of the partner-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rathership for the tax year. Retain Schedule K–1 for• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-than as royalty income. For information aboutyour records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.ness, and gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
• Whether or not the rental activity is con-get Publication 544. Partner’s return. You must generally report
ducted for profit. partnership items on your individual return theSale of property interest.If you sell yoursame way as they are reported on the partner-Generally, if your primary purpose is income orcomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,ship return. That is, if the partnership had aprofit and you are involved in the rental activitythe amount you receive is considered paymentcapital gain, you report your share on Schedulewith continuity and regularity, your rental activityfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyD (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-is a business. See Publication 535 for details onincome. Under certain circumstances, the saleship ordinary income on Schedule E (Formdeducting expenses for both business and is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on1040).not-for-profit activities. Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 Generally, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065)
Reporting business income and expenses. of Publication 544. will tell you where to report each item of
If you are in the business of renting personal income on your individual return.If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
TIP
property, report your income and expenses onor a net profit interest in a mineral property forSchedule C (Form 1040) or C–EZ (Form 1040). the life of the property, you have made a lease orThe related form instructions have information S Corporation Incomea sublease, and any cash you receive for theon how to complete them. assignment of other interests in the property isIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax onordinary income subject to a depletion allow-Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-ance.not in the business of renting personal property, tions, and credits of the corporation are passed
report your rental income on line 21 of FormPart of future production sold.If you own through to the shareholders based on each
1040. List the type and amount of the income onmineral property but sell part of the future pro-shareholder’s pro rata share. You must report
the dotted line to the left of the amount youduction, you generally treat the money you re-your share of these items on your return. Gener-
report on line 21. ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as aally, the items passed through to you will in-
loan from the buyer. Do not include it in yourcrease or decrease the basis of your SReporting nonbusiness expenses. If you income or take depletion based on it. corporation stock as appropriate.rent personal property for profit, include yourWhen production begins, you include all therental expenses in the total amount you enter on S corporation return.An S corporation mustproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-line 32 of Form 1040. Also, enter the amount file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxtion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatand “PPR ” on the dotted line to the left. Return for an S Corporation. This shows theamount to arrive at your taxable income from theIf you do not rent personal property for profit, results of the corporation’s operations for its taxproperty.your deductions are limited and you cannot re- year and the items of income, losses, deduc-port a loss to offset other income. In the discus- tions, or credits that affect the shareholders’Partnership Incomesion of Miscellaneous Income, later, see Activity individual income tax returns.not for profit under Other Income.
A partnership is generally not a taxable entity.Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). You should
The income, gains, losses, deductions, andreceive from the S corporation in which you areRoyalties credits of a partnership are passed through to a shareholder a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form
the partners based on each partner’s distributive1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Cred-Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,share of these items. its, Deductions, etc., showing your share of in-and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary
come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the Sincome.
Partner’s distributive share.Your distribu-corporation for the tax year. Retain ScheduleYou generally report royalties in Part I of
tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,K –1 for your records. Do not attach it to yourSchedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income
deductions, or credits is generally based on theForm 1040.and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil,
partnership agreement. You must report yourgas, or mineral interest or are in business as a
distributive share of these items on your returnShareholder’s return.Your distributive shareself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report
whether or not they are actually distributed to of the items of income, losses, deductions, oryour income and expenses on Schedule C
you. However, your distributive share of the credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-(1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba- arately on your Form 1040. The character of
sis of your partnership interest at the end of the these items generally is the same as if you hadCopyrights and patents. Royalties from
partnership year in which the losses took place. realized or incurred them personally.copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,
Page 13

Page 14 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, Schedule K – 1 (Form on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more come the part of your pension that you would
1120S) will tell you where to reportinformation on pensions and annuities, get Pub-have received if the pension had been based on
each item of income on your individuallication 575. a percentage of disability. You must include the
TIP
return. rest of your pension in your income.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If you
Retroactive VA determination.If you retirereceive payments from a retirement orDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis- from the armed services based on years of ser-profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-tributions are a nontaxable return of your basis vice and are later given a retroactivebility retirement, do not treat the payments as ain the corporation stock. However, in certain service-connected disability rating by the VA,disability pension. The payments must be re-cases, part of the distributions may be taxable your retirement pay for the retroactive period isported as a pension or annuity.as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term excluded from income up to the amount of VAcapital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri- disability benefits you would have been entitledAccrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-butions may be in the form of cash or property.bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for to receive. You can claim a refund of any tax
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. Thepaid on the excludable amount (subject to theMore information.For more information, see
payment is not a disability payment. Include it instatute of limitations) by filing an amended re-the instructions for Form 1120S.
your income in the tax year you receive it.turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
during the retroactive period.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
Military and Government ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-Sickness and Disability Pensions ity benefits, do not include in your income the
Injury Benefits portion of the severance payment equal to theCertain military and government disability pen-VA benefit you would have been entitled to re-sions are not taxable.Generally, you must report as income any ceive in that same year. However, you must
amount you receive for personal injury or sick- include in your income any lump-sum readjust-Service-connected disability.You may beness through an accident or health plan that is ment or other nondisability severance paymentable to exclude from income amounts you re-paid for by your employer. If both you and your you received on release from active duty, even ifceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceemployer pay for the plan, only the amount you you are later given a retroactive disability ratingfor personal injury or sickness resulting fromreceive that is due to your employer’s payments by the VA.active service in one of the following govern-is reported as income. However, certain pay-ment services.ments may not be taxable to you. For informa- Terrorist attack.Do not include in your in-
• The armed forces of any country.tion on nontaxable payments, see Military and come disability payments you receive for injuries
Government Disability Pensions and Sickness resulting directly from a violent attack that oc-• The National Oceanic and Atmosphericand Injury Benefits, later in this discussion. curs while you are a U.S. government employeeAdministration. performing official duties outside the UnitedCost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of• The Public Health Service. States. For your disability payments to be taxan accident or health plan, do not include any exempt, the Secretary of State must determine• The Foreign Service.amounts you receive from the plan for personal the attack was a terrorist attack.injury or sickness as income on your tax return.
Conditions for exclusion.Do not include As this publication was being preparedIf your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-
the disability payments in your income if any offor print, Congress was consideringpenses you deducted in an earlier year, you may
the following conditions apply. legislation that would provide tax reliefhave to include some, or all, of the reimburse- CAUTION
!
for any individual whose death or injuries re-ment in your income. See Recoveries under 1) You were entitled to receive a disabilitysulted from a terrorist or military action outsideMiscellaneous Income, later. payment before September 25, 1975. or within the United States. For more informa-Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are covered tion, see Publication 3920.2) You were a member of a listed govern-by an accident or health insurance plan throughment service or its reserve component, ora cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-were under a binding written commitmentance premiums was not included in your in- Long-Term Careto become a member, on September 24,come, you are not considered to have paid the1975. Insurance Contractspremiums and you must include any benefits
3) You receive the disability payments for ayou receive in your income. If the amount of the Long-term care insurance contracts are gener-combat-related injury. This is a personalpremiums was included in your income, you are ally treated as accident and health insuranceinjury or sickness that:considered to have paid the premiums and any contracts. Amounts you receive from them
benefits you receive are not taxable. (other than policyholder dividends or premiuma) Results directly from armed conflict,refunds) generally are excludable from income
b) Takes place while you are engaged inas amounts received for personal injury or sick-Disability Pensions
extra-hazardous service, ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made
If you retired on disability, you must include in on a per diem or other periodic basis under ac) Takes place under conditions simulat-income any disability pension you receive under long-term care insurance contract, you must fileing war, including training exercisesa plan that is paid for by your employer. You Form 8853 with your return.such as maneuvers, ormust report your taxable disability payments as A long-term care insurance contract is an
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A d) Is caused by an instrumentality of war.insurance contract that only provides coverageuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- for qualified long-term care services. The con-mum retirement age generally is the age at 4) You would be entitled to receive disabilitytract must:which you can first receive a pension or annuity compensation from the Department of Vet-
• Be guaranteed renewable,if you are not disabled. erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
tion for it. Your exclusion under this • Not provide for a cash surrender value orYou may be entitled to a tax credit ifcondition is equal to the amount you wouldother money that can be paid, assigned,you were permanently and totally dis-be entitled to receive from the VA. pledged, or borrowed,abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for • Provide that refunds, other than refundsPension based on years of service.If youthe Elderly or the Disabled. on the death of the insured or completereceive a disability pension based on years of
surrender or cancellation of the contract,Beginning on the day after you reach mini- service, you generally must include it in your
and dividends under the contract may bemum retirement age, payments you receive are income. But if it is a result of active service in one
used only to reduce future premiums ortaxable as a pension or annuity. Report the of the listed government services and one of the
increase future benefits, andpayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or listed conditions applies, do not include in in-
Page 14

Page 15 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Generally not pay or reimburse expenses you retired because of an occupational sickness• Benefits you receive under an accident or
or injury. health insurance policy on which eitherincurred for services or items that would
you paid the premiums or your employerbe reimbursed under Medicare, except If part of your workers’ compensation paid the premiums but you had to includewhere Medicare is a secondary payer or reduces your social security or them in your income.the contract makes per diem or other peri- equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
odic payments without regard to ex- received, that part is considered social security• Disability benefits you receive for loss ofpenses. (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andincome or earning capacity as a result of
may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxabilityinjuries under a no-fault car insurance
of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis- policy.Qualified long-term care services.Qualified
cellaneous Income, later.long-term care services are: • Compensation you receive for permanent
loss or loss of use of a part or function of• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-Return to work. If you return to work after your body, or for your permanent disfig-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-qualifying for workers’ compensation, payments urement. This compensation must betative services, and maintenance and you continue to receive while assigned to lightbased only on the injury and not on thepersonal care services, and duties are taxable. Report these payments asperiod of your absence from work. Thesewages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or• Required by a chronically ill individual and benefits are not taxable even if your em-on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.provided pursuant to a plan of care pre- ployer pays for the accident and health
scribed by a licensed health care practi- plan that provides these benefits.Disability pension.If your disability pensiontioner. is paid under a statute that provides benefits
only to employees with service-connected disa-Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in- bursement for medical care is generally not tax-That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yourdividual is one who has been certified by a able. However, it may reduce your medicalpension, based on years of service, is taxable aslicensed health care practitioner within the previ- expense deduction.pension or annuity income. If you die, the part ofous 12 months as one of the following. If you receive reimbursement for an expenseyour survivors’ benefit that is a continuation ofyou deducted in an earlier year, see Recoveries,1) An individual who, for at least 90 days, isthe workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.later.unable to perform at least two activities of
daily living without substantial assistanceOther Sickness
due to loss of functional capacity. Activitiesand Injury Benefitsof daily living are eating, toileting, transfer-
Miscellaneous Incomering, bathing, dressing, and continence.In addition to disability pensions and annuities,
you may receive other payments for sickness or2) An individual who requires substantial su- This section discusses various types of income.injury.pervision to be protected from threats to You may have taxable income from certainhealth and safety due to severe cognitive transactions even if no money changes hands.Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive asimpairment. For example, you may have taxable income ifsick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
you lend money at a below-market interest ratesurance Act are taxable and you must include
or have a debt you owe cancelled.them in your income. However, do not includeLimit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-
them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobments made on a per diem or other periodic
injury.basis under a long-term care insurance contract Bartering
is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the totalBlack lung benefit payments. These pay- Bartering is an exchange of property or services.of these payments and any accelerated deathments are similar to workers’ compensation and You must include in your income, at the timebenefits made on a per diem or other periodicgenerally are not taxable. received, the fair market value of property orbasis under a life insurance contract because
services you receive in bartering. If you ex-Federal Employees ’ Compensation Actthe insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-
change services with another person and you(FECA). Payments received under this Act fortion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
both have agreed ahead of time as to the valuepersonal injury or sickness, including paymentssurance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous
of the services, that value will be accepted asto beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.Income, later.)
fair market value unless the value can be shownHowever, you are taxed on amounts you receiveUnder this limit, the excludable amount for
to be otherwise.under this Act as continuation of pay for up toany period is figured by subtracting any reim-
45 days while a claim is being decided. ReportGenerally, you report this income on Sched-bursement received (through insurance or oth-
this income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Formule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Formerwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care
1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay1040). But if the barter involves an exchange ofservices during the period from the larger of the
for sick leave while a claim is being processed issomething other than services, such as in Ex-following amounts.
taxable and must be included in your income asample 4 below, you may have to use another
• The cost of qualified long-term care ser-wages. form or schedule instead.
vices during the period. You can deduct the amount you spend to
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to beExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-• The dollar amount for the period ($200 pereligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatney who performs legal services for a client, aday for any period in 2001). period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject tosmall corporation. The corporation gives you
See section C of Form 8853 and its instructionsthe 2% limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If youshares of its stock as payment for your services.
for more information. buy back sick leave in the same year you used it,You must include the fair market value of the
the amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay.shares in your income on Schedule C (Form
Do not deduct it separately. 1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) in theWorkers’ Compensation
year you receive them.Other compensation. Many other amountsAmounts you receive as workers’ compensation you receive as compensation for sickness orfor an occupational sickness or injury are fully Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-injury are not taxable. These include the follow-exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ countant. You and a house painter are membersing amounts.compensation act or a statute in the nature of a of a barter club. Members get in touch with each
workers’ compensation act. The exemption also• Compensatory damages you receive for other directly and bargain for the value of the
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-physical injury or physical sickness, services to be performed. In return for account-
ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitswhether paid in a lump sum or in periodic ing services you provided, the house painter
you receive based on your age, length of ser-payments. See Court awards and dam- painted your home. You must report as your
vice, or prior contributions to the plan, even ifages under Other Income, later. income on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule
Page 15

Page 16 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
C –EZ (Form 1040) the fair market value of the If tax is withheld from your barter in-Student loans. Certain student loans contain
come, the barter exchange will reporta provision that all or part of the debt incurred tohouse painting services you received. The
the amount of tax withheld on Formattend the qualified educational institution will behouse painter must include in income the fair
TIP
1099–B, or similar statement. canceled if you work for a certain period of timemarket value of the accounting services you
in certain professions for any of a broad class ofprovided.
employers.
Canceled Debts You do not have income if your student loanExample 3. You are self-employed and a
is canceled after you agreed to this provisionmember of a barter club. The club uses credit Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled orand then performed the services required. Tounits as a means of exchange. It adds creditforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youqualify, the loan must have been made by:units to your account for goods or services youmust include the canceled amount in your in-provide to members, which you can use to come. You have no income from the canceled1) The federal government, a state or localpurchase goods or services offered by otherdebt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,members of the barter club. The club subtractsincludes any indebtedness for which you are or subdivision thereof,credit units from your account when you receiveliable or which attaches to property you hold.
goods or services from other members. You 2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporationIf the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
that has assumed control of a state,must include in your income the value of thecanceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040. If it is
county, or municipal hospital, and whosecredit units that are added to your account, evena business debt, report the amount on Schedule
employees are considered public employ-though you may not actually receive goods orC (Form 1040) or C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on
ees under state law, orservices from other members until a later taxSchedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
year. Farming, if you are a farmer). 3) An educational institution:
Form 1099 – C. If a federal governmentExample 4. You own a small apartment a) Under an agreement with an entity de-agency, financial institution, or credit unionbuilding. In return for 6 months rent-free use of scribed in (1) or (2) that provided thecancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 oran apartment, an artist gives you a work of art funds to the institution to make themore, you will receive a Form 1099–C, Cancel-she created. You must report as rental income loan, orlation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debton Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value b) As part of a program of the institutionis shown in box 2.of the artwork, and the artist must report as designed to encourage students toincome on Schedule C (Form 1040) or ScheduleInterest included in canceled debt.If any serve in occupations or areas with un-interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofC –EZ (Form 1040) the fair rental value of the met needs and under which the ser-canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestapartment. vices provided are for or under thewill also be shown in box 3. Whether or not youdirection of a governmental unit or amust include the interest portion of the canceledForm 1099 –B from barter exchange.If you tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-debt in your income depends on whether theexchanged property or services through a barter tion.interest would be deductible if you paid it. Seeexchange, you should receive Form 1099–B,
Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.Proceeds from Broker and Barter Exchange A loan to refinance a qualified student loanIf the interest would not be deductible (suchTransactions, or a similar statement from the will also qualify if it was made by an educationalas interest on a personal loan), include in yourbarter exchange by January 31, 2002. It should institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-income the amount from box 2 of Form 1099–C.show the value of cash, property, services, cred- zation under its program designed as describedIf the interest would be deductible (such as on aits, or scrip you received from exchanges during in (3)(b) above.business loan), include in your income the net2001. The IRS will also receive a copy of Form An educational institution is an organizationamount of the canceled debt (the amount shown1099–B. with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxlarly enrolled body of students in attendance at3). the place where the educational activities areBackup withholding. The income you re-
carried on.ceive from bartering is generally not subject toDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financial
A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-institution offers a discount for the early paymentregular income tax withholding. However,
poration, community chest, fund, or foundationof your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-backup withholding will apply in certain circum-
organized and operated exclusively for one orcount is canceled debt. You must include thestances to ensure that income tax is collected on
more of the following purposes.canceled amount in your income.this income.
Under backup withholding, the barter ex- • Charitable.Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in
change must withhold, as income tax, 31% ofa corporation and the corporation cancels or• Educational.the income if: forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is
• Fostering national or international amateurdividend income to you.• You do not give the barter exchange your sports competition (but only if none of theIf you are a stockholder in a corporation andtaxpayer identification number (generally a organization’s activities involve providingyou cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-social security number or an employer athletic facilities or equipment).tion, you generally do not realize income. This isidentification number), or because the canceled debt is considered as a• Literary.• The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatcontribution to the capital of the corporation
• Preventing cruelty to children or animals.equal to the amount of debt principal that youyou gave it an incorrect identification num-
canceled.ber. • Religious.
If you join a barter exchange, you must certify • Scientific.under penalties of perjury that your taxpayerExceptions • Testing for public safety.identification number is correct and that you are
not subject to backup withholding. If you do notThere are several exceptions to the inclusion of
Exception. You do have income if your stu-make this certification, backup withholding maycanceled debt in income. These are explained
dent loan was made by an educational institu-begin immediately. The barter exchange willnext.
tion and is canceled because of services yougive you a Form W–9, Request for Taxpayer Nonrecourse debt. If you are not personallyperformed for the institution or other organiza-Identification Number and Certification, or a sim- liable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differenttion that provided the funds.ilar form, for you to make this certification.rules apply. You may have a gain or loss if a
The barter exchange will withhold tax only upnonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven in con-Deductible debt. You do not have income
to the amount of any cash paid to you or depos-junction with the foreclosure or repossession of from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of
ited in your account and any scrip or creditproperty to which the debt attaches. See Publi- the debt would be deductible. This exception
issued to you (and converted to cash). cation 544 for more information. applies only if you use the cash method of ac-
Page 16

Page 17 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of amount held by the insurance company for this ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
Publication 334. purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the Revenue Code.
guarantee.Price reduced after purchase.Generally, if Exclusion for terminal illness.Accelerated
Surviving spouse. If your spouse diedthe seller reduces the amount of debt you owe death benefits are fully excludable if the insured
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-for property you purchased, you do not have is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourincome from the reduction. The reduction of the has been certified by a physician as having an
spouse are received in installments, you candebt is treated as a purchase price adjustment illness or physical condition that can reasonably
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-and reduces your basis in the property. be expected to result in death within 24 months
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youfrom the date of the certification.Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled can continue to take the exclusion.debt in your gross income in the following situa- Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured
tions. is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallyInterest option on insurance.If an insurance
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basiscompany pays you interest only on proceeds• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case of costs incurred for qualified long-term carefrom life insurance left on deposit, the interestunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathyou are paid is taxable.cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. benefits paid on a per diem or other periodicIf you chose to receive only the interest from• The debt is canceled when you are insol- basis are excludable up to a limit. This limityour insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestvent. However, you cannot exclude any applies to the total of the accelerated deathexclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.amount of canceled debt that is more than benefits and any periodic payments receivedIf you later decide to receive the proceeds fromthe amount by which you are insolvent. from long-term care insurance contracts. Forthe policy in installments, you can take the inter-See Publication 908. information on the limit and the definitions ofest exclusion from the time you begin to receive
chronically ill individual, qualified long-termthe installments.• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- care services, and long-term care insuranceceled by a qualified person. See chapter 4 contracts, see Long-Term Care InsuranceSurrender of policy for cash.If you surren-of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide. Contracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,der a life insurance policy for cash, you must• The debt is qualified real property busi- earlier.include in income any proceeds that are moreness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationthan the cost of the life insurance policy. InException. The exclusion does not apply to334. general, your cost (or investment in the contract)any amount paid to a person (other than theis the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeinsured) who has an insurable interest in the lifeinsurance policy, less any refunded premiums,Life Insurance Proceeds of the insured because the insured:rebates, dividends or unrepaid loans that were
• Is a director, officer, or employee of thenot included in your income.Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of
person, orYou should receive a Form 1099–R showingthe death of the insured person are not taxable
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportunless the policy was turned over to you for a • Has a financial interest in the person’s
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid business.
1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.under an accident or health insurance policy or
an endowment contract. Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-Endowment proceeds. Endowment pro-
Proceeds not received in installments.If ated death benefits made on a per diem or otherceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity are
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withtaxable only if the proceeds are more than the
other than at regular intervals, include in your your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 tocost of the policy. To determine your cost, add
income only the benefits that are more than the exclude accelerated death benefits paid on thethe aggregate amount of premiums (or other
amount payable to you at the time of the insured basis of actual expenses incurred.consideration) paid for the contract and subtract
person’s death. If the benefit payable at death isany amount that you previously received under
not specified, you include in your income thethe contract and excluded from your income.Recoveriesbenefit payments that are more than the presentInclude the part of the lump sum payment that is
value of the payments at the time of death.   A recovery is a return of an amount you de-more than your cost in your income.
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. TheEndowment proceeds that you choose toProceeds received in installments.If you re- most common recoveries are refunds, reim-receive in installments instead of a lump-sumceive life insurance proceeds in installments, bursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedpayment at the maturity of the policy are taxedyou can exclude part of each installment from on Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also haveas an annuity. This is explained in Publicationyour income. recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as575. For this treatment to apply, you mustTo determine the excluded part, divide the
payments on previously deducted bad debts)choose to receive the proceeds in installmentsamount held by the insurance company (gener-
and recoveries of items for which you previouslybefore receiving any part of the lump sum. Thisally the total lump sum payable at the death of
claimed a tax credit.election must be made within 60 days after thethe insured person) by the number of install-
lump-sum payment first becomes payable toments to be paid. Include anything over this Tax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryyou.excluded part in your income as interest. in your income in the year you receive it up to the
amount by which the deduction or credit you
Example. The face amount of the policy is took for the recovered amount reduced your taxAccelerated Death Benefits$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re- in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. crease to an amount carried over to the currentCertain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-The excluded part of each installment is $625 year that resulted from the deduction or credit isefits under a life insurance contract or viatical($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year. considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-settlement before the insured’s death are ex-The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or lier year.cluded from income if the insured is terminally or$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income tochronically ill. Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed-you.
eral income taxes are not included in your in-Installments for life.If, as the beneficiaryViatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-come because they are never allowed as aunder an insurance contract, you are entitled to ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifededuction from income.receive the proceeds in installments for the rest insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
of your life without a refund or period-certain vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personState income tax refund.If you received a
guarantee, you figure the excluded part of each who regularly engages in the business of buying state or local income tax refund (or credit or
installment by dividing the amount held by the or taking assignment of life insurance contracts offset) in 2001, you generally must include it in
insurance company by your life expectancy. If on the lives of insured individuals who are termi- income if you deducted the tax in an earlier year.
there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the nally or chronically ill and who meets the require- You should receive Form 1099–G, Certain Gov-
Page 17

Page 18 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ernment and Qualified State Tuition ProgramDo not report any of the refund as income be- deductions were limited, see Itemized de-
Payments, from the payer by January 31, 2002.cause you did not itemize deductions for 2000.ductions limited, later.)
The IRS will also receive a copy of the Form 5) You had no unused tax credits. (If you had1099–G. Use the worksheet in the 2001 Form unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-Itemized Deduction Recoveries1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the amount its, later.)(if any) to include in your income.
The following discussion explains how to deter-6) You were not subject to alternative mini-Mortgage interest refund.If you received amine the amount to include in your income frommum tax. (If you were subject to alterna-refund or credit in 2001 of mortgage interest paida recovery of an amount deducted in an earliertive minimum tax, see Subject toin an earlier year, the amount should be shownyear as an itemized deduction. However, you alternative minimum tax, later.)in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestgenerally do not need to use this discussion if
If any of the above statements is not true,Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountthe recovery is for state or local income taxes
see Total recovery not included in income, later.from the interest you paid in 2001. You maypaid in 2000. Instead, use the worksheet in the
have to include it in your income under the rules2001 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figureWhere to report.Enter your state or localexplained in the following discussions. the amount (if any) to include in your income.income tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040, and
You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheetthe total of all other recoveries as other incomeInterest on recovery.Interest on any of theand must use this discussion if any of the follow-on line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot use Formamounts you recover must be reported as inter-ing statements is true. 1040A or Form 1040EZ.est income in the year received. For example,
report any interest you received on state or local• The recovery is for a tax year other thanExample. For 2000, you filed a joint return.income tax refunds on line 8a of Form 1040. 2000. Your taxable income was $20,000 and you were
Recovery and expense in same year.If the not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard• The recovery is for a deducted item other
refund or other recovery and the expense occur deduction was $7,350, and you had itemizedthan state or local income taxes, such as
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-real property taxes. deductions of $9,000. In 2001, you received the
duction or credit and is not reported as income. following recoveries for amounts deducted on• Your 2000 taxable income was less thanyour 2000 return:Recovery for 2 or more years.If you receive zero.
a refund or other recovery that is for amounts Medical expenses.............. $200• You made your last payment of 2000 stateyou paid in 2 or more separate years, you must State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0or local estimated tax in 2001.allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5amount between the years in which you paid it.• You owed alternative minimum tax for Total recoveries................ $925This allocation is necessary to determine the2000.
None of the recoveries were more than the de-amount of recovery from any earlier years and to• You could not deduct all your tax creditsductions taken for 2000.determine the amount, if any, of your allowablefor 2000 because their total was morededuction for this item for the current year. Because your total recoveries are less thanthan the amount of tax shown on line 42 ofthe amount by which your itemized deductionsyour 2000 Form 1040 minus any foreignExample. You paid 2000 estimated state exceeded the standard deduction ($9,000 −tax credit shown on line 43 of that form.income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments. $7,350 = $1,650), you must include your total
You made your fourth payment in January 2001.• You could be claimed as a dependent byrecoveries in your income for 2001. Report the
You had no state income tax withheld during someone else in 2000. state and local income tax refund of $400 on line
2000. In 2001, you received a $400 tax refund 10 of Form 1040, and the balance of your recov-
based on your 2000 state income tax return. You eries, $525, on line 21 of Form 1040.If you also recovered an amount de-claimed itemized deductions each year on your ducted as a non-itemized deduction,federal income tax return. Total recovery not included in income.Iffigure the amount of that recovery toCAUTION
!
You must allocate the $400 refund between one or more of the six statements listed in theinclude in your income and add it to your ad-2000 and 2001, the years in which you paid the preceding discussion is not true, you may bejusted gross income before applying the rulestax on which the refund is based. Since you paid able to exclude at least part of the recovery fromexplained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction75% ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) areRecoveries, later.2000, 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for true (your itemized deductions were not limited,
amounts you paid in 2000 and is a recovery you had no unused tax credits, and you were not
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item, subject to the alternative minimum tax), you canTotal recovery included in income. If you
you will include $300 on line 10, Form 1040, for use Table 1 to determine the part of your recov-recover any amount that you deducted in an
2001, and attach a copy of your computationearlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you ery of amounts deducted after 1986 to include in
showing why that amount is less than the generally must include the full amount of theyour income.
amount shown on the Form 1099–G you re- recovery in your income in the year you receiveAllocating the included part.If you areceived from the state. it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all ofnot required to include all of your recoveries inThe balance ($100) of the $400 refund is forthe following statements are true. your income, and you have both a state incomeyour January 2001 estimated tax payment.
tax refund and other itemized deduction recov-When you figure your deduction for state and1) Your itemized deductions exceeded theeries, you must allocate the taxable recoverieslocal income taxes paid during 2001, you willstandard deduction by at least the amountbetween the state tax refund you report on linereduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Yourof the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-10 of Form 1040 and the amount you report asdeduction for state and local income taxes paidtions did not exceed the standard deduc-other income on line 21 of Form 1040. If you doduring 2001 will include the January net amounttion by at least the amount of the recovery,not use Table 1, make the allocation as follows.of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated see Standard deduction limit, later.)
state income taxes paid in 2001 for 2001, and 1) Divide your state income tax refund by the2) You had taxable income. (If you had noany state income tax withheld during 2001. total of all your itemized deduction recov-taxable income, see Negative taxable in-
eries.come, later.)Deductions not itemized.If you did not item-
ize deductions for the year for which you re- 2) Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries3) Your deduction for the item recoveredceived the recovery of an expense that was by the percentage in (1). This is theequals or exceeds the amount recovered.deductible only if you itemized, do not include amount you report as a state income tax(If your deduction was less than theany of the recovery amount in your income. refund.amount recovered, see Recovery limited to
deduction, later.) 3) Subtract the result in (2) above from theExample. You filed your 2000 federal in-
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the4) Your itemized deductions were not subjectcome tax return on Form 1040A. In 2001 you
amount you report as other income.to the limit on itemized deductions. (If yourreceived a refund of your 2000 state income tax.
Page 18

Page 19 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1. Worksheet for Recoveries of Itemized Deductions—Deducted After 1986
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your 20 01 Form
1040, see “Total recovery not included in income” under “Itemized Deduction Recoveries.” If you recovered amounts from more than one
year, such as a state income tax refund from 2000 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 1999, complete a separate worksheet fo r each
year. Use information from Schedule A (Form 1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of th e deduction).
If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see “Unused tax credits” and “Subj ect to
alternative minimum tax” under “Itemized Deduction Recoveries.” If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you
should read “Itemized deductions limited” under “Itemized Deduction Recoveries.”
State/local income tax refund or credit.
1
Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements (excluding the amount you entered on line 1).
1
Add lines 1 and 2.
Itemized deductions for the prior year (for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2000).
Enter any amount previously refunded to you (do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).
Subtract line 5 from line 4.
Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction amounts for 2000, 1999,
and 1998 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.)
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. The amounts on lines 1
and 2 are not taxable.
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8.
Taxable income for prior year
2 
(for example, line 39, Form 1040 for 2000).
Amount to include in income for 2001:
● If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
● If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result (but not less than zero).
3
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the percentage.
Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040.
Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040.
1.
11.
10.
9.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
A.
B.
C.
1
Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year.
2
If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have
to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses.
3
For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
1)
2)
3)
8)
9)
11)
4)
5)
6)
7)
10)
B)
C)
A)
Example. In 2001 you recovered $2,500 ofStandard deduction limit.You are generally 2) The amount by which your itemized de-
your 2000 itemized deductions, but the recov- allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do ductions exceeded the standard deduc-
eries you must include in your 2001 income are not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized tion.
only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 deductions that are more than your standard
Standard deduction for earlier years.Towas due to your state income tax refund. The deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
determine if amounts recovered in 2001 must beamount you report as a state tax refund on line less you are required to itemize your deduc-
included in your income, you must know the10 of Form 1040 is $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year
standard deduction for your filing status for the$1,500]. The balance of the taxable recoveries, return were not more than your income for that
year the deduction was claimed. The standard$1,200, is reported as other income on line 21 of year, include in your income this year the lesser
deduction tables for 2000, 1999, and 1998 areForm 1040. of:
shown in  Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need the
1) Your recoveries, or
Page 19

Page 20 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,400
7,350
3,675
6,450
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,500
6,600
8,200
9,050
9,900
10,750
4,525
5,375
6,225
7,075
7,550
8,650
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,400
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,675
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,350
● Head of household, enter $6,450
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2000.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 2. 2000 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
standard deduction amounts for years beforeRecovery limited to deduction.You do not was more than a base amount. For example,
1998, see the copy of your return for that year.include in your income any amount of your re-this amount was:
covery that is more than the amount you de-
• For 2000, $128,950 ($64,475 if marriedExample. You filed a joint return for 2000ducted in the earlier year. The amount you
filing separately),with a taxable income of $25,000. Your itemizedinclude in your income is limited to the smaller
deductions were $8,700. The standard deduc-of: • For 1999, $126,600 ($63,300 if married
tion that you could have claimed was $7,350. In filing separately), and• The amount deducted on Schedule A2001, you recovered $2,400 of your 2000 item-
(Form 1040), or • For 1998, $124,500 ($62,250 if marriedized deductions. None of the recoveries were
filing separately).more than the actual deductions for 2000. In-• The amount recovered.
clude $1,350 of the recoveries in your 2001 If the limit applied, your itemized deductionsincome. This is the smaller of your recoveries were reduced by the smaller of the followingExample. During 2000, you paid $1,700 for($2,400) or the amount by which your itemized amounts.medical expenses. From this amount you sub-deductions were more than the standard deduc-
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedtion ($8,700 − $7,350 = $1,350). • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
gross income. Your actual medical expense de-ceeded the base amount.duction was $200. In 2001, you received a $500Negative taxable income.If your taxable in- • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-reimbursement from your medical insurance forcome was a negative amount, reduce the recov-
tions other than medical and dental ex-your 2000 expenses. The only amount of theery you must otherwise include in your income
penses, investment interest expense,$500 reimbursement that must be included inby the negative amount.
nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,your income for 2001 is $200— the amount ac-
tually deducted. and gambling losses.Example. The facts are the same as in the
previous example except you had a negative
If the amount you recovered was deducted inItemized deductions limited.You were sub-taxable income of $200 in 2000. You must in-
a year in which your itemized deductions wereject to the limit on itemized deductions in theclude $1,150 in your 2001 income, rather than
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)limited, you must include it in income up to the$1,350.
Page 20

Page 21 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,300
7,200
3,600
6,350
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,350
6,400
8,050
8,900
9,750
10,600
4,450
5,300
6,150
7,000
7,400
8,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,300
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,600
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,200
● Head of household, enter $6,350
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,050 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 1999.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 3. 1999 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
difference between the amount of itemized de- covery to an amount equal to your recov- of the recovery item. The net amount is
ery multiplied by the following fraction: the amount you actually paid reducedductions actually allowed that year and the
by the recovery amount (as reduced inamount you would have been allowed (the a) Your tax for the earlier year, deter- steps 1 and 2, if they apply).greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-mined after reducing your deductionsdard deduction) if you had figured your deduc- Note. If you were required to itemize yourby the recovery and applying the credit,tions using only the net amount of the recovery deductions in the earlier year, use step 3(b)overitem. and not step 3(a).
b) The total increase in your tax for theTo determine the part of the recovery you 4) Subtract the amount in step 3 from theearlier year, determined by subtractingmust include in income, follow the four steps amount of itemized deductions actually al-your actual tax before applying thebelow. If your earlier tax year does not involve lowed in the earlier year after applying thecredit from the tax in (a) before apply-negative taxable income or an unused tax credit, limit on itemized deductions.ing the credit.skip steps 1 and 2 and start with step 3.
The result of step 4 is the amount of the recov-
3) Figure the greater of: ery to include in your income for the year you1) If your taxable income for the earlier year
receive the recovery.was a negative amount, reduce your re- a) The standard deduction for the earlierFor more information on this computation,covery by the negative amount. year, or see Revenue Ruling 93–75. This ruling is in
2) If your tax for the earlier year was reducedb) The amount of itemized deductions youCumulative Bulletin 1993–2.
to zero by a tax credit that was not fully would have been allowed for the ear-
used in that year, and if reducing your de-lier year (after taking into account theExample. Eileen Martin is single. She had
duction for that year by the recovery wouldlimit on itemized deductions) if you had an AGI of $1,128,950 and itemized her deduc-
result in tax for that year, reduce your re- figured them using only the net amount tions on her federal income tax return for 2000.
Page 21

Page 22 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
If Your Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,250
7,100
3,550
6,250
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
If Your
Filing Status is:
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,300
6,350
7,950
8,800
9,650
10,500
4,400
5,250
6,100
6,950
7,300
8,350
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
And the Number
in the Box
Above is:
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,250
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,550
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,100
● Head of household, enter $6,250
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,050 ($850 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 1998.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$700
Table 4. 1998 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
80% reduction not applied (amountShe was not subject to alternative minimum tax the $5,000 refund is included in her income for
on line 4 of 2000 Itemizedand was not entitled to any credit against income 2001.
Deductiontax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000
Unused tax credits.If you recover an itemWorksheet) ($40,000 × 80%) . . . $32,000of state income taxes. However, Eileen de-
deducted in an earlier year in which you had2000 deduction (amount on line 10ducted only $10,000 in 2000 because her other-
of unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierwise allowable deductions of $40,000 were 2000 Itemized Deduction year’s tax to determine if you must include thereduced by $30,000. In 2001, she received aWorksheet) recovery in your income. To do this, add the$5,000 refund of her state income taxes for($40,000 − $30,000)......... $10,000 amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s2000. Refund received in 2001 of 2000 taxable income and refigure the tax and theThe following table shows how Eileen figuredstate credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-the $30,000 reduction and other amounts fromincome tax............... $5,000 puted tax, after application of the credits, is morethe Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2000 Net amount of 2000 state income than the actual tax in the earlier year, include theSchedule A (Form 1040) instructions. Thesetax ($40,000 − $5,000)....... $35,000 recovery in your income up to the amount byamounts are needed to figure the part of the
which it reduced the tax in the earlier year. For$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in herIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount ofthis purpose, any increase to an amount carriedincome for 2001. state income tax to figure her itemized deduc-over to the current year that resulted from de-tions for 2000, the deduction allowed wouldducting the recovered amount in the earlier yearAGI for 2000............... $1,128,950 have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa-is considered to have reduced your tax in theState income taxes paid in 2000 . . $40,000ble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000earlier year. If the recovery is for an itemized3% reduction (amount on line 8 of
($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000deduction claimed in a year in which the deduc-2000 Itemized Deduction
paid in 2000, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000tions were limited, see Itemized deductions lim-Worksheet)
 [($1,128,950 − $128,950) × 3%] $30,000 ($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 ofited, earlier.
Page 22

Page 23 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your tax, after application of the credits, recovery in your income up to the amount by sation you receive. You should receive a Form
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit which it reduced the tax in the earlier year. For 1099–G showing the amount paid to you. Gen-
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery this purpose, any increase to an amount carried erally, you enter unemployment compensation
in your income. over to the current year that resulted from de- on line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A,
ducting the recovered amount in the earlier year or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Example. In 2000, Jean Black filed as headis considered to have reduced your tax in theTypes of unemployment compensation.of household and itemized her deductions. Herearlier year. Unemployment compensation generally in-taxable income was $5,260 and her tax was If your tax, after application of the credits,cludes any amount received under an unem-$791. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200.does not change, you did not have a tax benefitployment compensation law of the United StatesThe credit reduced her tax to zero and she hadfrom the deduction. Do not include the recoveryor of a state. It includes the following benefits.an unused tax credit of $409 ($1,200 − $791). Inin your income.
2001, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized • Benefits paid by a state or the District of
deductions. She reduces her 2000 itemized de- Columbia from the Federal Unemployment
ductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’s Amounts Recovered for Credits Trust Fund.
tax on taxable income of $6,260. However, the
 If you received a recovery in 2001 for an item for• State unemployment insurance benefits.child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of
which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,$941. Jean’s tax liability for 2000 is not changed • Railroad unemployment compensationyou must increase your 2001 tax by the amountby reducing her deductions by the recovery. She benefits.of the recovery, up to the amount by which thedid not have a tax benefit from the recovered
credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. You• Disability payments from a governmentdeduction and does not include any of the recov-
had a recovery if there was a downward price program paid as a substitute for unem-ery in her income for 2001.
adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for ployment compensation. (Amounts re-
Subject to alternative minimum tax.If you which you claimed a credit. ceived as workers ’ compensation for
were subject to the alternative minimum tax inThis rule does not apply to the investment injuries or illness are not unemployment
the year of the deduction, you will have to re-credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of compensation. See Workers’ Compensa-
compute your tax for the earlier year to deter-these credits are covered by other provisions oftion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
mine if the recovery must be included in yourthe law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit earlier.)
income. This will require a recomputation of yourfor Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In- • Trade readjustment allowances under theregular tax, as shown in the preceding example,vestment Credit, for details. Trade Act of 1974.and a recomputation of your alternative mini-
mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not • Benefits under the Airline Deregulation ActSurvivor Benefitschange your total tax, you do not include the of 1978.
recovery in your income. However, if your total Generally, payments made by or for an em- • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-tax increases by any amount, you received a taxployer because of an employee’s death must be aster Relief Act Amendments of 1974.benefit from the deduction and you must includeincluded in income. The following discussions
the recovery in your income up to the amount byexplain the tax treatment of certain paymentsGovernmental program. If you contributewhich the deduction reduced your tax in themade to survivors. For additional information,to a governmental unemployment compensa-earlier year. see Publication 559. tion program and your contributions are not de-
ductible, amounts you receive under theLump-sum payments. Lump-sum payments program are not included as unemploymentyou receive from a decedent’s employer as theNon-Itemized Deduction compensation until you recover your contribu-surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accruedRecoveries tions.salary payments; distributions from employee
This section discusses recovery of deductionsprofit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonusRepayment of unemployment compensa-
other than those deducted on Schedule A (Formplans; or other items that should be treated sep-tion. If you repaid in 2001 unemployment
1040). arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment ofcompensation you received in 2001, subtract
these lump-sum payments depends on the typethe amount you repaid from the total amount youTotal recovery included in income.If you of payment. received and enter the difference on line 19 ofrecover an amount that you deducted in an ear- Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofSalary or wages.Salary or wages receivedlier year in figuring your adjusted gross income, Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourafter the death of the employee are usually ordi-you must generally include the full amount of the entry, write “Repaid” and the amount you repaid.nary income to you.recovery in your income in the year received. If you repaid unemployment compensation in
Qualified employee retirement plans. 2001 that you included in your income in anTotal recovery not included in income.If
Lump-sum distributions from qualified employeeearlier year, you can deduct the amount repaidany part of the deduction you took for the recov-
retirement plans are subject to special tax treat-on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize de-ered amount did not reduce your tax, you may
ment. For information on these distributions, getductions. See Repayments, later.be able to exclude at least part of the recovery
Publication 575 (or Publication 721 if you are thefrom your income. You must include the recov- Tax withholding.You can choose to havesurvivor of a federal employee or retiree).ery in your income only up to the amount by federal income tax withheld from your unem-which the deduction reduced your tax in the year ployment compensation. To make this choice,Deceased public safety officers.If you are aof the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) complete Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholdingsurvivor of a public safety officer who died in the
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax willline of duty, you may be able to exclude fromNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-
be withheld at 15% of your payment.income certain amounts you receive.come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-
For this purpose, the term public safetyery by that negative amount. Include this If you do not choose to have tax with-officer includes police and law enforcement of-reduced recovery in your income. held from your unemployment com-ficers, firefighters, and rescue squad and ambu-pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
Unused tax credits.If you recover an itemlance crew members. estimated tax. For more information on esti-deducted in an earlier year in which you had mated tax, get Publication 505, Tax Withholdingunused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierUnemployment Benefits and Estimated Tax.year’s tax to determine if you must include the
recovery in your income. To do this, add theThe tax treatment of unemployment benefits you
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s Supplemental unemployment benefits.receive depends on the type of program paying
taxable income and refigure the tax and the Benefits received from an employer-financedthe benefits.
credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom- fund (to which the employees did not contribute)
puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreUnemployment compensation. You must in- are not unemployment compensation. They are
than the actual tax in the earlier year, include the clude in your income all unemployment compen- taxable as wages and are subject to withholding
Page 23

Page 24 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend income.for income tax. They may be subject to socialWork-training program. Payments you re-
If you received a payment from Alaska’s mineralsecurity and Medicare taxes. For more informa- ceive from a state welfare agency for taking part
income fund (Alaska Permanent Fund divi-tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsin a work-training program are not included in
dend), report it as income on line 21 of Formin section 5 of Publication 15–A, Employer’s your income, as long as the payments (exclu-
1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of FormSupplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay- sive of extra allowances for transportation or
1040EZ. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or other costs) do not total more than the public
ent a document that shows the amount of theon line 1 of Form 1040EZ. welfare benefits you would have received other-
payment with the check. The amount is alsowise. If the payments are more than the welfareRepayment of benefits.You may have to reported to IRS.benefits you would have received, the entirerepay some of your supplemental unemploy-amount must be included in your income asment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment Alimony. Include in your income on line 11 ofwages.allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you Form 1040 any alimony payments you receive.
repay supplemental unemployment benefits inPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-Amounts you receive for child support are not
the same year you receive them, reduce thebility, you must include in income compensationincome to you. For complete information, get
total benefits by the amount you repay. If youyou receive for services you perform unless thePublication 504, Divorced or Separated Individ-
repay the benefits in a later year, you mustcompensation is otherwise excluded. However,uals.
include the full amount of the benefits in youryou do not include in income the value of goods,
income for the year you received them. Below-market loans. A below-market loan isservices, and cash that you receive, not in return
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an a loan on which no interest is charged or onfor your services, but for your training and reha-
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (You which the interest is charged at a rate below thebilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-
cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- applicable federal rate. If you make able amounts include payments for transportation
clude the repayment on line 32 of Form 1040, below-market gift or demand loan, you mustand attendant care, such as interpreter services
and write “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the include the forgone interest (at the federal rate)for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and
dotted line next to line 32. If the amount you as interest income on your return. These loansservices to help mentally retarded persons do
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you are considered a transaction in which you, thetheir work.
may be able to take a credit against your tax for lender, are treated as having made:
Disaster relief grants.Grants made underthe later year instead of deducting the amount • A loan to the borrower in exchange for athe Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help victims ofrepaid. For information on this, see Repay- note that requires the payment of interestnatural disasters are not included in income. Doments, later. at the applicable federal rate, andnot deduct casualty losses or medical expenses
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- that are specifically reimbursed by these disas-• An additional payment to the borrower,ment benefit payments from a private fund toter relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-which the borrower transfers back to youwhich you voluntarily contribute are taxable onlyments under the Act are taxable unemploymentas interest.if the amounts you receive are more than yourcompensation. See Unemployment compensa- Depending on the transaction, the additionaltotal payments into the fund. Report the taxabletion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier. payment to the borrower is treated as a:amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Mortgage assistance payments. Payments • Gift,Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you asmade under section 235 of the National Housing
an unemployed member of a union from regular • Dividend,Act for mortgage assistance are not included in
union dues are included in your income on linethe homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the• Contribution to capital,21 of Form 1040. homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
• Payment of compensation, orgram cannot be deducted.Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-
ceive from your employer during periods of un- • Another type of payment.Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
employment, under a union agreement that Payments made by a state to qualified people toThe borrower may have to report this paymentguarantees you full pay during the year, arereduce their cost of winter energy use are notas income, depending on its classification.taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 oftaxable.
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form For more information on below-market loans,
Nutrition Program for the Elderly.Food1040EZ. see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
State employees. Payments similar to a Campaign contributions. These contribu-gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-
state’s unemployment compensation may be tions are not income to a candidate unless theypare and serve free meals for the program,
made by the state to its employees who are not are diverted to his or her personal use. To beinclude in your income as wages the cash pay
covered by the state’s unemployment compen- exempt from tax, the contributions must beyou receive, even if you are also eligible for food
sation law. Although the payments are fully taxa- spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundbenefits.
ble, do not report them as unemployment for use in future campaigns. However, interest
compensation. Report these payments on line earned on bank deposits, dividends received onOther Income21 of Form 1040. contributed securities, and net gains realized on
sales of contributed securities are taxable andThe following brief discussions are arranged in
must be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S.Welfare and Other alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-
Income Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-cussed in greater detail in another publicationPublic Assistance Benefits zations. Excess campaign funds transferred toinclude a reference to that publication.
an office account must be included in the Do not include in your income benefit paymentsActivity not for profit.You must include on officeholder’s income on line 21 of Form 1040 infrom a public welfare fund, such as paymentsyour return income from an activity from whichthe year transferred.due to blindness. Payments from a state fund foryou do not expect to make a profit. An examplethe victims of crime should not be included in theof this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youCanceled sales contract.If you sell propertyvictims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure. (such as land or a residence) under a contract,welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-Enter this income on line 21 of Form 1040. but the contract is canceled and you return thepenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. YouDeductions for expenses related to the activity buyer’s money in the same tax year as themust include in your income any welfare pay-are limited. They cannot total more than the original sale, you have no income from the sale.ments obtained fraudulently. income you report, and can be taken only if you If the contract is canceled and you return the
Alaska residents. Payments the state of itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). buyer’s money in a later tax year, you must
Alaska makes to its citizens who meet certain See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi- include your gain in your income for the year of
age and residency tests that are not based on cation 535, Business Expenses, for information the sale. When you return the money and take
need are not welfare benefits. Include them in on whether an activity is considered carried on back the property in the later year, you treat the
income on line 21 of Form 1040. for a profit. transaction as a purchase that gives you a new
Page 24

Page 25 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Current income required to be distributed.basis in the property equal to the funds you 6) Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustreturn to the buyer. tress received to satisfy a claim under Title
that must distribute all of its current income, youVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.Special rules apply to the reacquisition of
must report your share of the distributable netreal property where a secured indebtedness Do not include in your income compensatoryincome, whether or not you actually received it.(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Fordamages for personal physical injury or physicalfurther information, see Repossession in Publi- Current income not required to be distrib-sickness (whether received in a lump sum orcation 537, Installment Sales. uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate orinstallments).
trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whetherEmotional distress.Damages you receiveCar pools. Do not include in your income to distribute all or part of the current income, youfor emotional distress due to a physical injury oramounts you receive from the passengers for must report:sickness are treated as received for the physicaldriving a car in a car pool to and from work.
• All income that is required to be distributedinjury or sickness. Do not include them in yourThese amounts are considered reimbursement
to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-income. If the emotional distress is due to afor your expenses. However, this rule does not
uted, pluspersonal injury that is unrelated to a physicalapply if you have developed car pool arrange-
injury or sickness (for example, employment dis-ments into a profit-making business of transport- • All other amounts actually paid or creditedcrimination or injury to reputation), you musting workers for hire. to you,include the damages in your income, except for
up to the amount of your share of distributableany damages you receive for medical care dueCash rebates.  A cash rebate you receive net income.to that emotional distress. Emotional distressfrom a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy
includes physical symptoms that result fromis not income. How to report. Treat each item of incomeemotional distress, such as headaches, insom-the same way that the estate or trust would treatnia, and stomach disorders.Example. You buy a new car for $9,000 it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income is
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from the distributed to you, you report the distribution asPre-existing agreement. If you receive
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you. dividend income on your return. The same ruledamages under a written binding agreement,
Your cost is $8,600. This is your basis on which applies to distributions of tax-exempt interestcourt decree, or mediation award that was in
you figure gain or loss if you sell the car, and and capital gains.effect (or issued on or before) September 13,
depreciation if you use it for business. The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell1995, you do not have to include in income any
you the type of items making up your share ofof those damages received on account of per-
Casualty insurance and other reimburse- the estate or trust income and any credits yousonal injuries or sickness.
ments. You generally should not report these are allowed on your individual income tax return.Credit card insurance.Generally, if you re-reimbursements on your return. Get Publication Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-ceive benefits under a credit card disability or547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts, for more ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areinformation.
taxable to you. These plans make the minimumGrantor trust.Income earned by a grantormonthly payment on your credit card account ifCharitable gift annuities.If you are the bene- trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-you cannot make the payment due to injury,ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in- ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overillness, disability, or unemployment. Report onclude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredline 21 of Form 1040 the amount of benefits youpayment in your income. property to the trust.) This rule applies if thereceived during the year that is more than theproperty (or income from the property) put intoThe payer will report the types of income youamount of the premiums you paid during thethe trust will or may revert (be returned) to thereceived on Form 1099–R. Report the gross year. grantor or the grantor’s spouse.distribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a,
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theor on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxedEnergy conservation subsidies. You can
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atas ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) onexclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theForm 1040, line 16b or on Form 1040A, line 12b.vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-
value of the transferred property.Report the portion taxed as capital gain onties for the purchase or installation of an energy
Schedule D, line 8, in column (f), and identify it inconservation measure for a dwelling unit. If theFees for services.Include all fees for yourcolumn (a). property is not a dwelling unit (nonresidentialservices in your income. Examples of these feesproperty), you can exclude 50% of the subsidy,are amounts you receive for services you per-Child support payments.You should not re-but only for amounts received under a writtenform as:port these payments on your return. Get Publi-contract in effect on September 13, 1995, and at
cation 504 for more information. all times thereafter. • A corporate director,
Energy conservation measure. This in- • An executor or administrator of an estate,Court awards and damages.  To determine ifcludes installations or modifications that are pri-• A notary public, orsettlement amounts you receive by compromisemarily designed to reduce consumption ofor judgment must be included in your income,electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-• An election precinct official.you must consider the item that the settlementagement of energy demand.replaces. Include the following as ordinary in-
Dwelling unit.This includes a house, apart- If you are not an employee and the feescome.
ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi- for your services from the same payer
1) Interest on any award. lar property. If a building or structure containstotal $600 or more for the year, you
TIP
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustmay receive a Form 1099–MISC.2) Compensation for lost wages or lost profits
be properly allocated.in most cases.
Corporate director. Corporate directorEstate and trust income. An estate or trust,3) Punitive damages. It does not matter if fees are self-employment income. Report theseunlike a partnership, may have to pay federalthey relate to a physical injury or physical payments on Schedule C (Form 1040) orincome tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estatesickness. Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its
4) Amounts received in settlement of pensionincome distributed or required to be distributedExecutor or administrator of an estate.If
rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).to you. However, there is never a double tax. you are not in the trade or business of being an
Estates and trusts file their returns on Form executor (for instance, you are the executor of a5) Damages for:
1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andfriend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on
Trusts, and your share of the income is reported line 21 of Form 1040. If you provide the servicesa) Patent or copyright infringement,
to you on Schedule K – 1 (Form 1041), as a trade or business, report them as self-em-b) Breach of contract, or Beneficiary’s Share of Income, Deductions, ployment income on Schedule C (Form 1040) or
c) Interference with business operations.Credits, etc. Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
Page 25

Page 26 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Notary public.Report payments for theseby Day-Care Providers), to help you determine the National Historic Preservation Act to pre-
services on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Sched- the amount you can deduct for the use of your serve a historically significant property.
ule C–EZ (Form 1040). These payments are home. Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notnot subject to self-employment tax. (See the deductible from other income. A hobby is anFree tour. If you received a free tour from aseparate instructions for Schedule C (Form activity from which you do not expect to make atravel agency for organizing a group of tourists,1040) for details.) profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier in thisyou must include its value in your income. Re-
Election precinct official.You should re- discussion.port the fair market value of the tour on line 21 of
ceive a Form W–2 showing payments for ser-Form 1040 if you are not in the trade or businessIf you collect stamps, coins, or othervices performed as an election official orof organizing tours. You cannot deduct your items as a hobby for recreation andelection worker. Report these payments on lineexpenses in serving as the voluntary leader of pleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 ofthe group at the group’s request. If you organizeyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, ifForm 1040EZ. tours as a trade or business, report the tour’s you sell items from your collection at a loss, youvalue on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedulecannot deduct the loss.Food program payments to day care provid-C –EZ (Form 1040).ers. If you operate a day care service and
Holocaust victims restitution.Under newreceive payments under the Child Care FoodGambling winnings. You must include your
law enacted in 2001, the federal tax treatment ofProgram administered by the Department of Ag-gambling winnings in your income on line 21 of
payments received by Holocaust victims (orriculture that are not for your services, the pay-Form 1040. If you itemize your deductions on
their heirs) as restitution for Nazi persecutionments generally are not included in your income.Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-
has been clarified. Restitution payments re-However, you must include in your income anybling losses you had during the year, but only up
ceived after December 31, 1999 (and interestpart of the payments you do not use to provideto the amount of your winnings.
earned on the payments, including interestfood to children eligible for help under the pro-Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-gram. ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-counts or funds) are not taxable. You also do nottion to cash winnings, you must include in yourFoster-care providers.Payments you re- include them in any computations in which youincome the fair market value of bonds, cars,ceive from a state, political subdivision, or would ordinarily add excludable income to yourhouses, and other noncash prizes.tax-exempt child-placement agency for provid- adjusted gross income, such as the computationing care to qualified foster individuals in your to determine the taxable part of social securityInstallment payments. Generally, if youhome generally are not included in your income. benefits. If the payments are made in property,win a state lottery prize payable in installments,However, you must include in your income pay- your basis in the property is its fair market valueyou must include in your gross income the an-ments received for the care of more than 5 when you receive it.nual payments and any amounts you receiveindividuals age 19 or older and certain Excludable restitution payments are pay-designated as interest on the unpaid install-difficulty-of-care payments. ments or distributions made by any country orments. If you sell future lottery payments for aA qualified foster individual is a person who: any other entity because of persecution of anlump sum, you must report the amount you re-
individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalceive from the sale as ordinary income (line 21,1) Is living in a foster family home, and or mental disability, or sexual orientation by NaziForm 1040) in the year you receive it.
2) Was placed there by: Germany, any other Axis regime, or any otherForm W –2G. You may have received a Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetherForm W – 2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,a) An agency of a state or one of its politi- the payments are made under a law or as ashowing the amount of your gambling winningscal subdivisions, or result of a legal action. They include compensa-and any tax taken out of them. Include thetion or reparation for property losses resultingb) If the individual is under age 19, aamount from box 1 on line 21 of Form 1040. Befrom Nazi persecution, including proceedstax-exempt placement agency licensedsure to include any amount from box 2 on line 59under insurance policies issued before and dur-by a state or one of its political subdivi-of Form 1040. ing World War II by European insurance compa-sions.
nies.Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isAmending your 2000 return.If your treat-Difficulty-of-care payments.These are not included in your income. However, if prop-ment of restitution payments received in 2000additional payments that are designated by theerty you receive this way later produces incomewas different from the treatment describedpayer as compensation for providing the addi-such as interest, dividends, or rents, that incomeabove and caused you to pay more tax, youtional care that is required for physically, men-is taxable to you. If property is given to a trustshould file an amended return for 2000 on Formtally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fosterand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Taxindividuals. A state must determine that the ad-tributed to you, that income is also taxable toReturn. To claim a refund of tax, you shouldditional compensation is needed, and the careyou. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is thegenerally file the amended return by April 15,for which the payments are made must be pro-income from the property, that income is taxable2004. See the form instructions for more infor-vided in your home. to you. mation.You must include in your income
Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited adifficulty-of-care payments received for more Illegal income.Illegal income, such as stolenpension or an individual retirement arrangementthan: or embezzled funds, must be included in your(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-income on line 21 of Form 1040, or on Schedule• 10 qualified foster individuals under ageited amount in your income. See Survivors and C (Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)19, or Beneficiaries in Publication 575 if you inherited aif from your self-employment activity.pension. See Inherited IRAs in Publication 590,• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), if Indian fishing rights.If you are a member ofolder.
you inherited an IRA. a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights
secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofMaintaining space in home.If you are paid Expected inheritance.If you sell an inter-Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeto maintain space in your home for emergencyest in an expected inheritance from a living per-in your income amounts you receive from activi-foster care, you must include the payment inson, include the entire amount you receive inties related to those fishing rights. The income isyour income. gross income on line 21 of Form 1040. not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,Reporting taxable payments. If you re- Bequest for services.If you receive cashor employment taxes.ceive payments that you must include in youror other property as a bequest for services youincome, you are in business as a foster-care Interest on frozen deposits.In general, youperformed while the decedent was alive, theprovider and you are self-employed. Report the exclude from your income the amount of interestvalue is taxable compensation.payments on Schedule C (Form 1040) or earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozen
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040). Get PublicationHistoric preservation grants.Do not include if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannot
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Usein your income any payment you receive under withdraw any part of the deposit because:
Page 26

Page 27 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ring customers to them. You must include the 2) You are not required to perform substantial• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- future services as a condition for receivingkickbacks in your income.solvent, or the prize or award.
• The state where the institution is locatedManufacturer incentive payments. You 3) The prize or award is transferred by thehas placed limits on withdrawals becausemust include as other income on Form 1040, linepayer directly to a governmental unit orother financial institutions in the state are21 (or Schedule C or C–EZ if you are self-em- tax-exempt charitable organization as des-bankrupt or insolvent. ployed) incentive payments from a manufac- ignated by you. The following conditionsturer that you receive as a salesperson. This isapply to the transfer.Excludable amount. The amount of inter-true whether you receive the payment directly
est you exclude from income for the year is thefrom the manufacturer or through your em- a) You cannot use the prize or award
interest that was credited on the frozen depositployer. before it is transferred.
for that tax year minus the sum of:
b) You should provide the designationExample. You sell cars for an automobile1) The net amount withdrawn from the de- before the prize or award is presenteddealership and receive incentive payments fromposit during that year, and to prevent a disqualifying use. The des-the automobile manufacturer every time you sellignation should contain:a particular model of car. You report the incen-2) The amount that could have been with-
tive payments on line 21 of Form 1040.drawn at the end of that tax year (not re- i) The purpose of the designation by
duced by any penalty for premature making a reference to section
withdrawals of a time deposit). Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and 74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Medicare+Choice MSAs).  You do not gener- Code,The excluded part of the interest is included inally include in income amounts you withdrawyour income in the tax year it becomes with- ii) A description of the prize or award,from your Archer MSA or Medicare+Choicedrawable. MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified iii) The name and address of the or-
medical expenses. Generally, qualified medicalInterest on qualified savings bonds.You ganization to receive the prize or
expenses are those you can deduct on Sched-may be able to exclude from income the interest award,
ule A (Form 1040). For more information aboutfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if iv) Your name, address, and taxpayerArcher MSAs or Medicare+Choice MSAs, seeyou pay qualified higher educational expenses identification number, andPublication 969, Medical Savings Accountsin the same year. Qualified higher educational
(MSAs).expenses are those you pay for tuition and v) Your signature and the date signed.
required fees at an eligible educational institu-
Moving expense reimbursements. You gen-tion for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A c) In the case of an unexpected presenta-
erally should not report these benefits on yourqualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE tion, you must return the prize or award
return. Get Publication 521 for more information.bond issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The before using it (or spending, depositing,
bond must have been issued to you when you investing it, etc., in the case of money)
were 24 years of age or older. For more informa- and then prepare the statement as de-Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a
tion on this exclusion, see Education Savings scribed in (b).lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz
Bond Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550.program, beauty contest, or other event, youd) After the transfer, you should receivemust include it in your income. For example, iffrom the payer a written response stat-Interest on state and local government obli-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, ing when and to whom the designatedgations. This interest is usually exempt fromyou must report this income on line 21 of Form amounts were transferred.federal tax. However, you must show the 1040. If you refuse to accept a prize, do notamount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-include its value in your income. These rules do not apply to scholarship oreral income tax return. For more information,Prizes and awards in goods or services mustfellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-see State or Local Government Obligations in be included in your income at their fair marketships, later.chapter 1 of Publication 550. value.
Railroad retirement annuities.The followingJob interview expenses.If a prospective em-Employee awards or bonuses. Cash types of payments are treated as pension orployer asks you to appear for an interview andawards or bonuses given to you by your em-annuity income and are taxable under the ruleseither pays you an allowance or reimburses youployer for good work or suggestions generallyexplained in Publication 575.for your transportation and other travel ex-must be included in your income as wages.penses, the amount you receive is generally notHowever, certain noncash employee achieve- • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that aretaxable. You include in income only the amountment awards can be excluded from income. Seemore than the “social security equivalentyou receive that is more than your actual ex-Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous benefit.”penses. Compensation, earlier. • Tier 2 benefits.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must bePrize points.If you are a salesperson and• Vested dual benefits.included in your income on line 21 of Form 1040.receive prize points redeemable for merchan-
If you must give the pay to your employer be-dise, which are awarded by a distributor to em-
cause your employer continues to pay your sal- Rate reduction credit.If you received aployees of dealers, you must include their fair
ary while you serve on the jury, you can deduct check from the IRS during 2001 for the advancemarket value in your income. The “prize points”
the amount turned over to your employer as an payment of the rate reduction credit, do notare taxable in the year they are paid or made
adjustment to income. Include the amount you report it on your tax return. It is not taxable. Foravailable to you, rather than in the year you
repay your employer on line 32 of Form 1040. more information about the rate reduction credit,redeem them for merchandise.
Write “Jury pay” and the amount on the dotted see Publication 553, Highlights of 2001 TaxPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If youline next to line 32. Changes and the Rate Reduction Credit Work-were awarded a prize in recognition of pastsheet in the instructions for Form 1040 (or FormKickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side accomplishments in religious, charitable, scien-1040A or 1040EZ).commissions, push money, or similar payments tific, artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields,
you receive in your income on line 21 of Form you generally must include the value of the prizeSale of home. You may be able to exclude
1040, or on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Sched- in your income. However, you do not include thisfrom income all or part of any gain from the sale
ule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from your self-employ- prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-or exchange of a personal residence. Get Publi-
ment activity. ing requirements. cation 523.
1) You were selected without any action onExample. You sell cars and help arrange Sale of personal items.If you sold an item
your part to enter the contest or proceed-car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay you owned for personal use, such as a car,
ing.back part of their commissions to you for refer- refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or
Page 27

Page 28 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.Form SSA –1099. If you received social se-State tuition programs.If you receive distri-
Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can- butions from a qualified state tuition program,curity benefits during the year, you will receive
not deduct a loss. only the amount that is more than the amountForm SSA –1099, Social Security Benefit State-
contributed to the program is taxable.ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withHowever, if you sold an item you held for
A qualified state tuition program is one that isinvestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,your Form SSA–1099. This notice includes a
established and maintained by a state or anor gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainworksheet you can use to figure whether any of
agency or instrumentality of a state and that isand any loss is deductible as a capital loss.your benefits are taxable.
set up to provide for a student’s qualified higherFor an explanation of the information foundeducational expenses at an eligible educationalScholarships and fellowships.A candidate on your Form SSA–1099, get Publication 915.institution. See Publication 970, Tax Benefits forfor a degree can exclude amounts received as a
Form RRB – 1099. If you received Higher Education, for more information.qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified
equivalent railroad retirement or special guar-scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- Transporting school children. Do not in-anty benefits during the year, you will receiveceive that is for: clude in your income a school board mileageForm RRB –1099, Payments by the Railroad allowance for taking children to and from school• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anRetirement Board. if you are not in the business of taking children toeducational organization, or For an explanation of the information foundschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-on your Form RRB–1099, get Publication 915.ing this transportation.quired for courses at the educational insti-If you received other railroad retirement ben-Union benefits and dues.Amounts deductedtution. efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier. from your pay for union dues, assessments,Amounts used for room and board do not qual- Joint return.If you are married and file acontributions, or other payments to a union can-ify. Get Publication 520 for more information onjoint return, you and your spouse must combinenot be excluded from your income.qualified scholarships and fellowship grants.your incomes and your social security and You may be able to deduct some of these
equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-payments as a miscellaneous deduction subjectPayments for services.Payments you re-
uring whether any of your combined benefits areto the 2% limit if they are related to your job andceive for services required as a condition of
if you itemize deductions on Schedule A (Formtaxable. Even if your spouse did not receive anyreceiving a scholarship or fellowship grant must
1040). For more information, get Publicationbenefits, you must add your spouse’s income tobe included in your income, even if the services
529, Miscellaneous Deductions.yours when figuring if any of your benefits areare required of all candidates for the degree.
This includes amounts received for teaching andtaxable. Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paidresearch. Include these payments on line 7 of to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in theForm 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Form including both cash and the fair market value ofForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruction package1040EZ. other property, are usually included in your in-to determine the amount of your benefits to
come as compensation. You can exclude theseBeginning in 2002, scholarship include in your income. Publication 915 also has
benefits from your income only when the factsamounts you receive under the Na- worksheets you can use. However, you must
clearly show that the union intended them astional Health Service Corps (NHSC)use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any of
CAUTION
!
gifts to you.Scholarship Program or the F. Edward Hebertthe following situations applies.
Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarship Reimbursed union convention expenses.• You received a lump-sum benefit paymentand Financial Assistance Program (the Armed If you are a delegate of your local union chapterduring the year that is for one or moreForces Scholarship Program) are not included in and you attend the annual convention of theearlier years.your income even if you must agree to perform international union, do not include in your in-certain services to get the scholarship. See Pub- come amounts you receive from the interna-• You exclude qualified adoption expenses,lication 553, Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes for tional union to reimburse you for expenses ofinterest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,details. traveling away from home to attend the conven-or interest paid on a student loan.
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-For information about the rules that apply to• You take the foreign earned income exclu-penses, even if you are reimbursed in a latera tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided tosion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, youemployees and their families by an educationalduction, the exclusion of income from U.S.must include that reimbursement in your in-institution, see Publication 520. possessions, or the exclusion of incomecome.VA payments. Allowances paid by the De- from Puerto Rico by bona fide residents of
Utility rebates.If you are a customer of anpartment of Veterans Affairs are not included inPuerto Rico.
electric utility company and you participate in theyour income. These allowances are not consid-
utility’s energy conservation program, you mayBenefits may affect your IRA deduction.ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
receive on your monthly electric bill either:You must use the special worksheets in Appen-Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestdix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notbenefits and your IRA deduction if all of thetricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orhave to use the prizes for educational purposes.following conditions apply.You must include these amounts in your income • A nonrefundable credit against theon line 21 of Form 1040, whether or not you use• You receive social security or equivalentpurchase price of the electricity.the amounts for educational purposes. railroad retirement benefits. The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-
• You have taxable compensation. able credit is not included in your income.Social security and equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits.  Social security or • You contribute to your IRA.equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if taxa-
• You or your spouse is covered by a retire-ble, must be included in the income of the per-
ment plan at work.son who has the legal right to receive the Repayments
benefits. Whether any of your benefits are taxa-
How to report. If any of your benefits areble, and the amount that is taxable, depends on If you had to repay an amount that you included
taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Formthe amount of the benefits and your other in- in your income in an earlier year, you may be
1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot usecome. able to deduct the amount repaid from your
Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (theSocial security benefits include any monthly income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
amount in box 5 of your Forms SSA–1099 andbenefit under Title II of the Social Security Act the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
RRB –1099) on line 20a of Form 1040, or lineand any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit may be able to take a credit against your tax for
14a of Form 1040A. Report the taxable parttreated as a social security benefit. Social secur- the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you
(from the last line of the worksheet) on line 20bity benefits do not include any supplemental can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
of Form 1040, or on line 14b of Form 1040A.security income (SSI) payments. ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in
Page 28

Page 29 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2000 2000your trade or business or in a for-profit transac- • Call the Taxpayer Advocate at With Income  Without Incometion. 1–877–777–4778.Taxable
Income $15,000 $10,000 • Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.Type of deduction.The type of deduction you
Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504 • Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocateare allowed in the year of repayment depends
office in your area.on the type of income you included in the earlier 2001 2001year. You generally deduct the repayment on • Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are athe same form or schedule on which you previ- Without TTY/TDD user.ously reported it as income. For example, if you Deduction With Deduction
reported it as self-employment income, deduct itTaxable For more information, see Publication 1546,as a business expense on Schedule C (FormIncome $49,950 $44,950 The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.1040) or C–EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F Tax $10,362 $ 8,987(Form 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain,
Free tax services.To find out what servicesdeduct it as a capital loss on Schedule D (FormYour tax under method 1 is $8,987. Your tax
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free1040). If you reported it as wages, unemploy- under method 2 is $9,612, figured as follows:
ment compensation, or other nonbusiness in- Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-
Tax previously determined for 2000 . . $2,254come, deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-
Less: Tax as refigured........... −deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040). scribes other free tax information services,1,504 including tax education and assistance pro-If you repaid social security or equivalentDecrease in 2000 tax $750 grams and a list of TeleTax topics.railroad retirement benefits, get Publication 915.Regular tax liability for 2001........ $10,362
Less: Decrease in 2000 tax........ − 750 Personal computer. With your per-
Refigured tax for 2001 $9,612 sonal computer and modem, you canRepayment — $3,000 or less.If the amount
access the IRS on the Internet atyou repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromBecause you pay less tax using method 1, youwww.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, youyour income in the year you repaid it. If you mustshould take a deduction for the repayment in
can:deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,2001.
enter it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). • Find answers to questions you may have.Repayment rules do not apply.This discus-
sion does not apply to: • Download forms and publications or
Repayment — over $3,000.If the amount you search for forms and publications by topic• Deductions for bad debts,repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct or keyword.the repayment, as described earlier. However,• Deductions from sales to customers, such
• View forms that may be filled in electroni-you can instead choose to take a tax credit foras returns and allowances, and similar
cally, print the completed form, and thenthe year of repayment if you included the income items, or
save the form for recordkeeping.under a claim of right. This means that at the • Deductions for legal and other expensestime you included the income, it appeared that • View Internal Revenue Bulletins publishedof contesting the repayment.you had an unrestricted right to it. If you qualify in the last few years.for this choice, figure your tax under both meth-
Year of deduction (or credit).If you use the • Search regulations and the Internal Reve-ods and compare the results. Use the method
cash method, you can take the deduction (or nue Code.(deduction or credit) that results in less tax.
credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which you• Receive our electronic newsletters on hotMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2001 claimingactually make the repayment. If you use any tax issues and news.a deduction for the repaid amount. If you mustother accounting method, you can deduct the
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax• Get information on starting and operatingenter it on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).year in which it is a proper deduction under youra small business.
accounting method. For example, if you use anMethod 2. Figure your tax for 2001 claiming
accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-You can also reach us with your computera credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.steps.
tion for the repayment accrues.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone at-1) Figure your tax for 2001 without deduct-
tached to your fax machine, you caning the repaid amount.
receive forms and instructions by call-2) Refigure your tax from the earlier yearHow To Get Tax Help ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions fromwithout including in income the amount the prompts. When you order forms, enter theyou repaid in 2001. You can get help with unresolved tax issues,catalog number for the form you need. The items
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown you request will be faxed to you.
tions, and get more information from the IRS inon your return for the earlier year. This is For help with transmission problems, call theseveral ways. By selecting the method that isthe credit. FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608.best for you, you will have quick and easy ac-
4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forcess to tax help. Phone. Many services are available by2001 figured without the deduction (step
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you phone.1). have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,payer Advocate.
tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-claim a credit for the amount repaid on line 65 ofThe Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-
rent and prior year forms, instructions, andForm 1040, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to lineterests and concerns within the IRS by protect-
publications.65. ing your rights and resolving problems that have
not been fixed through normal channels. While• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withExample. For 2000 you filed a return andTaxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax lawyour tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.reported your income on the cash method. Inor make a technical tax decision, they can clear
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access2001 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2000up problems that resulted from previous con-
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–income under a claim of right. Your filing statustacts and ensure that your case is given a com-
4059 to ask tax questions or to orderin 2001 and 2000 is single. Your income and taxplete and impartial review.
for both years are as follows: forms and publications.To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
Page 29

Page 30 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to stores, copy centers, city and county govern- CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publica-
listen to pre-recorded messages covering ments, credit unions, and office supply stores tion 1796, Federal Tax Products on
various tax topics. have an extensive collection of products avail- CD-ROM, and obtain:
able to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from• Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices andEvaluating the quality of our telephone ser- cations.libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regu-vices. To ensure that IRS representatives give • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.lations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-accurate, courteous, and professional answers,lative Bulletins available for research purposes.• Popular tax forms that may be filled inwe evaluate the quality of our telephone ser-
electronically, printed out for submission,vices in several ways. Mail. You can send your order for and saved for recordkeeping.• A second IRS representative sometimes forms, instructions, and publications to
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.monitors live telephone calls. That person the Distribution Center nearest to you
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does and receive a response within 10 workdays after
The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-not keep a record of any taxpayer’s name your request is received. Find the address that
tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) byor tax identification number. applies to your part of the country.
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at• We sometimes record telephone calls to • Western part of U.S.: www.irs.gov. The first release is available inevaluate IRS assistors objectively. We Western Area Distribution Center mid-December and the final release is availablehold these recordings no longer than one Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001 in late January.week and use them only to measure the IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Re-• Central part of U.S.:quality of assistance. source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM thatCentral Area Distribution Center
contains information important to small busi-• We value our customers’ opinions. P.O. Box 8903
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You canThroughout this year, we will be surveying Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676our customers for their opinions on our• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign or visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov.service. addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
Walk-in. You can walk in to many post P.O. Box 85074
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick Richmond, VA 23261–5074
up certain forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
Page 30

Page 31 of 31 of Publication 525 10:35 - 17-MAY-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Estate and trust income.... 2 5 Restricted property....... 1 0AK
Retirement contributions..... 7Activity not for profit....... 2 4 Kickbacks.............. 2 7
Royalties.............. 1 3Adoption assistance........ 4 F
Advance commissions...... 2 Faculty lodging........... 5 L
Alaska Permanent Fund Fees, receipt of.......... 2 5 SLife insurance:
dividend............. 2 4 Accelerated deathFinancial counseling fees.... 4 S  corporation income...... 1 3
Alimony ............... 2 4 benefits............ 1 7Food program payments.... 2 6 Sale of home........... 2 7
Allowances and Interest option ......... 1 7Foreign employer........ 1 2 Sale of personal items..... 2 7
reimbursements......... 2 Lump-sum payments ..... 2 3Form: Scholarships ............ 2 8Paid before death....... 1 7Archer MSA contributions.... 4 RRB –1099 ........... 2 8 School children, transport . . . 28Permanent benefits....... 5Assistance (See Tax help) SSA –1099 ........... 2 8 Severance pay ........... 3Premiums ............. 4Awards ..............3 ,  2 7 W –2 .............. 2 ,  4 Sick pay................ 3Proceeds ............ 1 7W –2 G .............. 2 6 Sickness and injuryLodging ................ 5Foster parents andB benefits............ 14, 15Long-term care coverageproviders............. 2 6Baby-sitting............. 2 Social security:benefits............... 4Free tax services......... 2 9 Benefits............. 2 8Back pay awards.......... 2 Lottery winnings......... 2 6Fringe benefits: Payments by employer.... 3Bartering: Accident or health plan.... 4 State income tax refundsBackup withholding...... 1 6 Accounting period........ 3 M (see Recoveries)....... 1 7Income from .......... 1 5 Athletic facilities......... 4 Manufacturer incentive State welfare payments.... 2 4Below-market loans....... 2 4 De minimis (minimal)...... 4 payments ............ 2 7 Stock appreciation rights..... 3Bonuses and awards....... 3 Dependent care benefits . . . 4Meals and lodging......... 5 Stock options:Employee discounts...... 4 Medical savings accounts Employee stock purchaseC Faculty lodging.......... 5 (MSAs) .............. 2 7 plans............... 9Financial counseling fees . . . 4Campaign contributions.... 2 4 Military retirement pay . . . 12, 14Nonstatutory........... 8Life insurance.......... 4Canceled debts.......... 1 6 More information (See Tax help) Statutory.............. 9Meals and lodging....... 5Canceled sales contract.... 2 4 Mortgage assistance Stock options:Moving expenseCar pools.............. 2 5 payments ............ 2 4 Strike and lockout benefits . . 28reimbursed........... 6Cash rebate............ 2 5 Moving expense Student loan, canceled..... 1 6No-additional-cost service . . 6Casualty insurance and reimbursement........6 ,  2 7Provider of benefit....... 3 Suggestions............. 2other reimbursements.... 2 5 MSAs, Archer........... 2 7Recipient of fringe benefit . . 3 SupplementalCharitable gift annuities.... 2 5 Taxation of............ 6 unemployment benefits . . . 23
Child support payments.... 2 5 Transportation.......... 6 NChild-care provider........ 2 Valuation of............ 6 Nonstatutory stock options . . . 8TWorking condition benefit . . . 6Clergy................ 1 1 Note received for services.... 3 Tax help............... 2 9Fringe benefits:Comments .............. 2 Nutrition Program........ 2 4 Taxpayer Advocate....... 2 9Commissions ............ 2 Tours, free............. 2 6Constructive receipt of G Transportation..........6 ,  2 8Oincome ............... 2 Gambling winnings....... 2 6 Trust and estate income.... 2 5Overseas employment..... 1 2Contributions to retirement Gifts and inheritances...... 2 6 TTY/TDD information...... 2 9plan ................. 7 Gifts from employer........ 4 Tuition programs......... 2 8Cost-of-living allowances, PGroup-term life insurance.... 4 Tuition reduction.......... 6government ............ 3 Parsonage, rental value of . . . 11
Court awards........... 2 5 Partnership income....... 1 3HCredit card insurance...... 2 5 UPeace Corps............ 1 2Help (See Tax help)Credit, rate reduction.....1 ,  2 7 UnemploymentPrepaid income........... 2Historic preservation grants . . 26 compensation ......... 2 3Credits, recoveries for..... 2 3 Prizes and awards........ 2 7Hobby income and losses . . . 26 Union benefits........... 2 8Public assistance payments . . 24Holocaust victims........ 2 6 Utility rebates........... 2 8Public safety officers...... 2 3D Housing allowance, clergy . . . 11Publications (See Tax help)Damages .............. 2 5
VDeceased employees,
Ibeneficiaries of......... 2 3 Veterans’ benefits........ 1 2RIllegal income........... 2 6Disability pensions, Volunteers............. 1 2Railroad retirementIndian fishing rights....... 2 6including military and Volunteers in Service tobenefits, tier 1....... 27, 28
Inheritances............ 2 6government ........... 1 4 America (VISTA)....... 1 2Rate reduction credit.....1 ,  2 7
Insurance proceeds fromDisaster relief grants...... 2 4 Rebate, new car purchase . . . 25long-term care contract . . . 14Dividends, restricted stock . . . 10 Recoveries: WInterest, not taxable..... 26, 27 Credits.............. 2 3 Welfare payments........ 2 4Interview expenses....... 2 7 Included in income...... 1 7E Work-training programs . . . 3, 24Itemized deduction Itemized deductions..... 1 8Educational assistance...... 4 Workers’ compensation.... 1 5recoveries............ 1 8 Non-itemized deduction . . . 23Elective deferrals.......... 7 IRecoveries:Employee compensation..... 2
J Religious orders......... 1 1Endowment proceeds...... 1 7
Jury duty pay........... 2 7 Rental of personal property . . 13Energy conservation
Repayments ............ 2 8subsidies............ 2 5
Page 31