Userid: SD_G74GB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: T:\Pub 535_2011\P535_Flat_2011_03132012.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction .................... . 1Department
of the What's New for 2011 .............. . 2Treasury Business
What's New for 2012 .............. . 2Internal
Revenue Reminders ..................... . 2ExpensesService
1. Deducting Business
Expenses .................. . 2
2. Employees' Pay .............. . 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................ . 8
4. Interest .................... . 102011 Returns
5. Taxes ..................... . 15
6. Insurance .................. . 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize .................. . 21
8. Amortization ................ . 25
9. Depletion ................... . 33
10. Business Bad Debts ........... . 38
11. Other Expenses .............. . 40
12. How To Get Tax Help .......... . 46
Index ......................... . 49
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. You can also send us comments from
www.irs.gov/formspubs/, select ªComment on
Tax Forms and Publications ºunder ªInformation
about.º
Although we cannot respond individually to
each comment received, we do appreciate yourGet forms and other information feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.faster and easier by:
Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Internet IRS.gov www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Mar 13, 2012

Page 2 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
address below and receive a response within 10 • Use an authorized IRS e-file provider. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
days after your request is received. • Use a personal computer. ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Internal Revenue Service Individuals, Estates, and Trusts• Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway (VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and MethodsBloomington, IL 61705-6613 (TCE) site. ❏ 542 Corporations
For details on these fast filing methods, see yourTax questions. If you have a tax question, ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsincome tax package.check the information available on IRS.gov or ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homecall 1-800-829-4933. We cannot answer tax Form 1099 MISC. File Form 1099-MISC, Mis- (Including Use by Daycarequestions sent to either of the above addresses. cellaneous Income, for each person to whom Providers)you have paid during the year in the course of
❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulesyour trade or business at least $600 in rents,
services (including parts and materials), prizes ❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interestand awards, other income payments, medicalWhat's New for 2011 Deductionand health care payments, and crop insurance
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyproceeds. See the Instructions for FormStandard mileage rate. For 2011, the stan- 1099-MISC for more information and additionaldard mileage rate for the cost of operating your Form (and Instructions)reporting requirements.car, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of
business use is: ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized DeductionsPhotographs of missing children. The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the• 51 cents per mile for the period January 1 ❏ 5213 Election To PostponeNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-through June 30, 2011, and Determination as To Whether thedren. Photographs of missing children selected Presumption Applies That an• 55.5 cents per mile for the period from by the Center may appear in this publication on Activity Is Engaged in for ProfitJuly 1 through December 31, 2011. pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at the See chapter 12 for information about gettingSelf-employed health insurance deduction. photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST publications and forms.For tax years beginning after 2010, you cannot (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
deduct any self-employed health insurance de-
duction you report on Form 1040, line 29, from
self-employment earnings. See chapter 6.
What Can I Deduct?Oil and gas from marginal properties.  The
temporary suspension of the 100% taxable in- To be deductible, a business expense must be
come limit on percentage depletion on oil and both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-1.natural gas produced from marginal properties pense is one that is common and accepted inapplies to depletion in tax years beginning in your industry. A necessary expense is one that2010 or 2011. See chapter 9. is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-
Deducting ness. An expense does not have to be indispen-Future developments. The IRS has created
sable to be considered necessary.a page on IRS.gov for information about Publi-
Even though an expense may be ordinarycation 535, at www.irs.gov/pub535. Information Business
about any future developments affecting Publi- and necessary, you may not be allowed to de-
cation 535 (such as legislation enacted after we duct the expense in the year you paid or incurredExpensesrelease it) will be posted on that page. it. In some cases you may not be allowed to
deduct the expense at all. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to distinguish usual business expenses
from expenses that include the following.IntroductionWhat's New for 2012 • The expenses used to figure cost of goodsThis chapter covers the general rules for deduct-
sold,ing business expenses. Business expenses are
Standard mileage rate. For 2012, the stan- the costs of carrying on a trade or business, and • Capital expenses, anddard mileage rate for the cost of operating your they are usually deductible if the business is
car, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of • Personal expenses.operated to make a profit.
business use is 55.5 cents per mile
Topics Cost of Goods SoldThis chapter discusses:
If your business manufactures products orReminders • What you can deduct purchases them for resale, you generally must
value inventory at the beginning and end of each• How much you can deductThe following reminders and other items may tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.help you file your tax return. • When you can deduct Some of your business expenses may be in-
cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of• Not-for-profit activitiesIRS e-file (Electronic Filing) goods sold is deducted from your gross receipts
to figure your gross profit for the year. If youUseful Items include an expense in the cost of goods sold,You may want to see: you cannot deduct it again as a business ex-
pense.Publication The following are types of expenses that goYou can file your tax returns electronically using
into figuring cost of goods sold.an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-file ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business
include faster refunds, increased accuracy, and • The cost of products or raw materials, in-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Caracknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return. cluding freight.ExpensesYou can use one of the following IRS e-file
• Storage.options. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Direct labor (including contributions to Usually you recover costs for a particular Capital versus Deductible
asset through depreciation. Generally, you can-pension or annuity plans) for workers who Expensesnot recover other costs until you sell the busi-produce the products.
ness or otherwise go out of business. However, To help you distinguish between capital and• Factory overhead. you can choose to amortize certain costs for deductible expenses, different examples are
setting up your business. See Starting a Busi- given below.Under the uniform capitalization rules, you ness in chapter 8 for more information on busi-must capitalize the direct costs and part of the Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize theness start-up costs.indirect costs for certain production or resale cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.
activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, You can recover its cost through annual deduc-If your attempt to go into business is unsuc-taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack- tions for depreciation.cessful. If you are an individual and your at-
aging, handling, and administrative costs. There are dollar limits on the depreciationtempt to go into business is not successful, the
This rule does not apply to personal property you can claim each year on passenger automo-expenses you had in trying to establish yourself
biles used in your business. See Publicationyou acquire for resale if your average annual in business fall into two categories.
463.gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for
1. The costs you had before making a deci- Generally, repairs you make to your busi-the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10
sion to acquire or begin a specific busi- ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,million.
ness. These costs are personal and amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul aFor more information, see the following nondeductible. They include any costs in- business vehicle are capital expenses and aresources. curred during a general search for, or pre- recovered through depreciation.
• Cost of goods soldÐchapter 6 of Publica- liminary investigation of, a business or
Roads and driveways.  The cost of building ainvestment possibility.tion 334.
private road on your business property and the
2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac-• InventoriesÐPublication 538. cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-
quire or begin a specific business. These crete one are capital expenses you may be able• Uniform capitalization rulesÐPublication costs are capital expenses and you can to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev- deduct them as a capital loss. road on your business property is a deductibleenue Code and the related regulations. expense.If you are a corporation and your attempt to
go into a new trade or business is not success- Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulesCapital Expenses ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourcosts as a loss. business are deductible expenses if the toolsYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some The costs of any assets acquired during your have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theircosts. These costs are a part of your investment unsuccessful attempt to go into business are a cost is minor.in your business and are called ªcapital ex- part of your basis in the assets. You cannot takepenses.º Capital expenses are considered as- Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-a deduction for these costs. You will recover thesets in your business. In general, you capitalize zation rules apply, the cost of replacingcosts of these assets when you dispose of them.
three types of costs. short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in good
working condition, but not add to its life, is a• Business start-up costs (See Tip below).
deductible expense.Business Assets• Business assets.
Heating equipment. The cost of changingThere are many different kinds of business as-• Improvements. from one heating system to another is a capitalsets; for example, land, buildings, machinery,
expense.furniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.
You can elect to deduct or amortize You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-
certain business start-up costs. See sets, including freight and installation charges. Personal versus Business
chapters 7 and 8. Certain property you produce for use in your
TIP Expenses
trade or business must be capitalized under theCost recovery. Although you generally can-
uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, ornot take a current deduction for a capital ex- section 1.263A-2 for information on these rules. family expenses. However, if you have an ex-pense, you may be able to recover the amount
pense for something that is used partly for busi-you spend through depreciation, amortization, ness and partly for personal purposes, divideor depletion. These recovery methods allow you Improvements the total cost between the business and per-to deduct part of your cost each year. In this sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.way, you are able to recover your capital ex- The costs of making improvements to a busi- For example, if you borrow money and usepense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- ness asset are capital expenses if the improve- 70% of it for business and the other 30% for ation (chapter 9) in this publication. A taxpayer ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%can elect to deduct a portion of the costs of lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to a of the interest as a business expense. The re-different use. Improvements are generally majorcertain depreciable property as a section 179 maining 30% is personal interest and generallyexpenditures. Some examples are: new electricdeduction. A greater portion of these costs can is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationwiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,be deducted if the property is qualified disaster on deducting interest and the allocation rules.bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andassistance property. See Publication 946 for de-
lighting improvements. Business use of your home. If you use parttails.
of your home for business, you may be able toHowever, you can currently deduct repairs
deduct expenses for the business use of yourthat keep your property in a normal efficient
home. These expenses may include mortgageGoing Into Business operating condition as a business expense.
interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-Treat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of
The costs of getting started in business, before ciation.a machine that only keep it in a normal operating
you actually begin business operations, are cap- To qualify to claim expenses for the businesscondition.
ital expenses. These costs may include ex- use of your home, you must meet both of the
penses for advertising, travel, or wages for following tests.Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re-
training employees. conditioning, improving, or altering your prop- 1. The business part of your home must beerty as part of a general restoration plan to make used exclusively and regularly for yourIf you go into business. When you go into it suitable for your business. This applies even if trade or business.business, treat all costs you had to get your some of the work would by itself be classified as
business started as capital expenses. repairs. 2. The business part of your home must be:
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Your principal place of business, or Net operating loss. If your deductions are
more than your income for the year, you mayHow Much Can Ib. A place where you meet or deal with have a ªnet operating loss.º You can use a netpatients, clients, or customers in the operating loss to lower your taxes in other years.Deduct?normal course of your trade or busi- See Publication 536 for more information.ness, or See Publication 542 for information aboutGenerally you can deduct the full amount of a
net operating losses of corporations.c. A separate structure (not attached to business expense if it meets the criteria of ordi-
your home) used in connection with nary and necessary and it is not a capital ex-
your trade or business. pense.
Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefitYou generally do not have to meet the exclu- When Can I
rule). If you recover part of an expense in thesive use test for the part of your home that you
same tax year in which you would have claimed Deduct an Expense?regularly use either for the storage of inventory
a deduction, reduce your current year expenseor product samples, or as a daycare facility.
by the amount of the recovery. If you have a When you can deduct an expense depends onYour home office qualifies as your principal recovery in a later year, include the recovered your accounting method. An accounting methodplace of business if you meet the following re- amount in income in that year. However, if part is a set of rules used to determine when and howquirements. of the deduction for the expense did not reduce income and expenses are reported. The two
your tax, you do not have to include that part of• You use the office exclusively and regu- basic methods are the cash method and the
the recovered amount in income. accrual method. Whichever method you chooselarly for administrative or management ac-
For more information on recoveries and the must clearly reflect income.tivities of your trade or business.
tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. For more information on accounting meth-• You have no other fixed location where ods, see Publication 538.you conduct substantial administrative or Payments in kind. If you provide services to
management activities of your trade or pay a business expense, the amount you can Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-business. deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. counting, you generally deduct business ex-
You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor. penses in the tax year you pay them.If you have more than one business location, Similarly, if you pay a business expense indetermine your principal place of business Accrual method. Under an accrual method ofgoods or other property, you can deduct only
based on the following factors. accounting, you generally deduct business ex-what the property costs you. If these costs are
penses when both of the following apply.included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct• The relative importance of the activities
them again as a business expense.performed at each location. 1. The all-events test has been met. The test
is met when:• If the relative importance factor does not Limits on losses. If your deductions for an
determine your principal place of busi- investment or business activity are more than a. All events have occurred that fix the factness, consider the time spent at each lo- the income it brings in, you have a loss. There of liability, andcation. may be limits on how much of the loss you can
deduct. b. The liability can be determined with rea-
sonable accuracy.If you were entitled to deduct deprecia- Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on your
tion on the part of your home used for business activity without the intention of making 2. Economic performance has occurred.business, you cannot exclude the part a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset
CAUTION
!
of the gain from the sale of your home that other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities later. Economic performance. You generallyequals any depreciation you deducted (or could cannot deduct or capitalize a business expenseAt-risk limits. Generally, a deductible losshave deducted) for periods after May 6, 1997. until economic performance occurs. If your ex-from a trade or business or other in-
For more information, see Publication 587. pense is for property or services provided to you,come-producing activity is limited to the invest-
or for your use of property, economic perform-ment you have ªat riskº in the activity. You are at
ance occurs as the property or services arerisk in any activity for the following.Business use of your car. If you use your car
provided, or the property is used. If your ex-exclusively in your business, you can deduct car 1. The money and adjusted basis of property pense is for property or services you provide toexpenses. If you use your car for both business you contribute to the activity. others, economic performance occurs as youand personal purposes, you must divide your provide the property or services.2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activityexpenses based on actual mileage. Generally,
if:commuting expenses between your home and Example. Your tax year is the calendaryour business location, within the area of your year. In December 2011, the Field Plumbinga. You are personally liable for repayment,tax home, are not deductible. Company did some repair work at your place ofor
You can deduct actual car expenses, which business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid itb. You pledge property (other than prop-include depreciation (or lease payments), gas by check in January 2012. If you use the accrualerty used in the activity) as security forand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourthe loan.registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- tax return for 2011 because all events have
ness part of these actual expenses, you may be occurred to ªfixº the fact of liability (in this caseFor more information, see Publication 925. the work was completed), the liability can beable to use the standard mileage rate to figure
determined, and economic performance oc-Passive activities. Generally, you are in ayour deduction. For 2011, the standard mileage
curred in that year.passive activity if you have a trade or businessrate is 51 cents before July 1, 2011. The rate is
activity in which you do not materially partici- If you use the cash method of accounting,55.5 cents a mile for business miles driven after
pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductions deduct the expense on your 2012 return.June 30, 2011, and before January 1, 2012.
for losses from passive activities only offset in-If you are self-employed, you can also de- come from passive activities. You cannot use Prepayment. You generally cannot deductduct the business part of interest on your car any excess deductions to offset other income. In expenses in advance, even if you pay them inloan, state and local personal property tax on the addition, passive activity credits can only offset advance. This rule applies to both the cash andcar, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you the tax on net passive income. Any excess loss accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,claim the standard mileage rate. or credits are carried over to later years. Sus- prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-
For more information on car expenses and pended passive losses are fully deductible in the pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, year you completely dispose of the activity. For create an asset with a useful life extending sub-
see Publication 463. more information, see Publication 925. stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. In 2011, you sign a 10-year lease Presumption of profit. An activity is pre- this category. Deduct them on the appropriate
and immediately pay your rent for the first 3 sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). For taxable
years. Even though you paid the rent for 2011, in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the years beginning after Dec. 31, 2008, you can
2012, and 2013, you can only deduct the rent for current year. Activities that consist primarily of deduct a casualty loss on property you own for
2011 on your 2011 tax return. You can deduct breeding, training, showing, or racing horses are personal use only to the extent it is more than
the rent for 2012 and 2013 on your tax returns presumed carried on for profit if they produced a $500 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted gross
for those years. profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- income. The 10% AGI limitation does not apply
ing the current year. The activity must be sub- to net disaster losses resulting from federally
Contested liability. Under the cash method, stantially the same for each year within this declared disasters in 2008 and 2009 and individ-
you can deduct a contested liability only in the period. You have a profit when the gross income uals are allowed to claim the net disaster losses
year you pay the liability. Under the accrual from an activity exceeds the deductions. even if they do not itemize their deductions. The
method, you can deduct contested liabilities reduction amount returns to $100 for taxableIf a taxpayer dies before the end of thesuch as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses- years beginning after Dec. 31, 2009. See Publi-5-year (or 7-year) period, the ªtestº period endssion income, war profits, and excess profits cation 547 for more information on casualtyon the date of the taxpayer's death.taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability losses. For the limits that apply to home mort-If your business or investment activity(or transfer money or other property to satisfy gage interest, see Publication 936.passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRSthe obligation) or in the tax year you settle the will presume it is carried on for profit. Thiscontest. However, to take the deduction in the Category 2. Deductions that do not result inmeans the limits discussed here will not apply.year of payment or transfer, you must meet an adjustment to the basis of property are al-You can take all your business deductions fromcertain conditions. See Regulations section lowed next, but only to the extent your grossthe activity, even for the years that you have a1.461-2. income from the activity is more than your de-loss. You can rely on this presumption unless
ductions under the first category. Most businessthe IRS later shows it to be invalid.Related person. Under an accrual method of deductions, such as those for advertising, insur-accounting, you generally deduct expenses ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,Using the presumption later. If you are start-when you incur them, even if you have not yet belong in this category.ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) yearspaid them. However, if you and the person you showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-owe are related and that person uses the cash Category 3. Business deductions that de-sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) yearsmethod of accounting, you must pay the ex- crease the basis of property are allowed last, butof experience allowed by the test.pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction only to the extent the gross income from theYou can elect to do this by filing Form 5213.is allowed when the amount is includible in in- activity exceeds the deductions you take underFiling this form postpones any determinationcome by the related cash method payee. See the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-that your activity is not carried on for profit until 5Related Persons in Publication 538. tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty loss(or 7) years have passed since you started the an individual could not deduct in category (1)activity. belong in this category. Where more than oneThe benefit gained by making this election is asset is involved, allocate depreciation andthat the IRS will not immediately questionNot-for-Profit Activities these other deductions proportionally.whether your activity is engaged in for profit.
Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. Individuals must claim the amounts inIf you do not carry on your business or invest- Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in the categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-ment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) ous deductions on Schedule A (Form
TIPloss from the activity to offset other income. years of profit at the end of this period, your 1040). They are subject to theActivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport deductions are not limited under these rules. If 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-or recreation, are often not entered into for profit. you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit cation 529 for information on this limit.The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to can be applied retroactively to any year with aindividuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitcorporations. It does not apply to corporations
Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the activity. The income and expenses of the activityother than S corporations.
period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (or are as follows.In determining whether you are carrying on
7-year) period to 2 years after the due date ofan activity for profit, several factors are taken
the return for the last year of the period. The Gross income ................ . $3,200into account. No one factor alone is decisive.
period is extended only for deductions of theAmong the factors to consider are whether: Subtract:activity and any related deductions that might be Real estate taxes ....... . $700• You carry on the activity in a businesslike affected. Home mortgage interest ... . 900manner, Insurance ............ . 400You must file Form 5213 within 3 years
• The time and effort you put into the activity Utilities .............. . 700after the due date of your return (deter-
indicate you intend to make it profitable, Maintenance .......... . 200mined without extensions) for the year
TIP
Depreciation on an automobile 600in which you first carried on the activity, or, if• You depend on the income for your liveli- Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700earlier, within 60 days after receiving writtenhood,
notice from the Internal Revenue Service pro- Loss ...................... . $(500)• Your losses are due to circumstances be- posing to disallow deductions attributable to the
yond your control (or are normal in the activity.
start-up phase of your type of business), Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the
• You change your methods of operation in gross income she earned from the activity. TheLimit on Deductions
an attempt to improve profitability, limit is reached in category (3), as follows.
If your activity is not carried on for profit, take• You (or your advisors) have the knowl- Limit on deduction ............ . $3,200deductions in the following order and only to theedge needed to carry on the activity as a extent stated in the three categories. If you are Category 1: Taxes andsuccessful business, an individual, these deductions may be taken interest .............. . $1,600• You were successful in making a profit in only if you itemize. These deductions may be Category 2: Insurance,similar activities in the past, taken on Schedule A (Form 1040). utilities, and maintenance .. . 1,300 2,900
• The activity makes a profit in some years, Available for Category 3 ....... . $ 300Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-and sonal as well as for business activities are al-
• You can expect to make a future profit lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-from the appreciation of the assets used in deductions, such as those for home mortgage tween the automobile and machine as follows.the activity. interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can claim employment credits like enterprises pay for the same or similar serv-$600 depreciation for thex $300 = $225 such as the following if you hire individ- ices.$800 automobile uals who meet certain requirements.
TIP To determine if pay is reasonable, also con-
sider the following items and any other pertinent• Empowerment zone and renewal commu-$200 depreciation for thex  $300 = $75 facts.nity employment credit (Form 8844).$800 machine
• The duties performed by the employee.• Indian employment credit (Form 8845).
The basis of each asset is reduced accord- • The volume of business handled.• Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).ingly.
• The character and amount of responsibil-Ida includes the $3,200 of gross income on • Credit for employer differential wage pay-
ity.line 21 (other income) of Form 1040. The $1,600 ments (Form 8932).
for category (1) is deductible in full on the appro- • The complexities of your business.
priate lines for taxes and interest on Schedule A Reduce your deduction for employee wages
• The amount of time required.(Form 1040). Ida deducts the remaining $1,600 by the amount of any employment credits you
($1,300 for category (2) and $300 for category claim. For more information about these credits, • The cost of living in the locality.
(3)) as other miscellaneous deductions on see the form on which the credit is claimed. • The ability and achievements of the indi-Schedule A (Form 1040) subject to the
vidual employee performing the service.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. Topics • The pay compared with the gross and netThis chapter discusses:Partnerships and S corporations. If a part- income of the business, as well as with
nership or S corporation carries on a distributions to shareholders if the busi-• Tests for deducting paynot-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the ness is a corporation.
partnership or S corporation level. They are re- • Kinds of pay • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-flected in the individual shareholder's or part-
ployees.ner's distributive shares.
Useful Items • The history of pay for each employee.You may want to see:More than one activity. If you have several
undertakings, each may be a separate activity or
Publicationseveral undertakings may be combined. The Test 2ÐFor Services
following are the most significant facts and cir- Performed❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guidecumstances in making this determination.
You must be able to prove the payment was❏ 15-A Employer's Supplemental Tax• The degree of organizational and eco- made for services actually performed.Guidenomic interrelationship of various under-
takings. ❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-Benefits• The business purpose that is (or might be) ration pays an employee who is also a share-
served by carrying on the various under- holder a salary that is unreasonably highSee chapter 12 for information about gettingtakings separately or together in a busi- considering the services actually performed, thepublications and forms.ness or investment setting. excessive part of the salary may be treated as a
constructive distribution to the em-• The similarity of the undertakings. ployee-shareholder. For more information on
corporate distributions to shareholders, seeThe IRS will generally accept your characteri- Tests for Publication 542, Corporations.zation if it is supported by facts and circum-
stances. Deducting Pay
If you are carrying on two or more dif-
To be deductible, your employees' pay must beferent activities, keep the deductions Kinds of Payan ordinary and necessary expense and youand income from each one separate.
TIP
must pay or incur it. These and other require-Figure separately whether each is a Some of the ways you may provide pay to yourments that apply to all business expenses arenot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on employees in addition to regular wages or sala-explained in chapter 1.deductions and losses separately for each activ- ries are discussed next. For specialized andity that is not for profit. In addition, the pay must meet both of the detailed information on employees' pay and thefollowing tests. employment tax treatment of employees' pay,
see Publications 15, 15-A, and 15-B.• Test 1. It must be reasonable.
• Test 2. It must be for services performed. Awards
The form or method of figuring the pay does not
You can generally deduct amounts you pay toaffect its deductibility. For example, bonuses
2. your employees as awards, whether paid inand commissions based on sales or earnings,
cash or property. If you give property to anand paid under an agreement made before the
employee as an employee achievement award,services were performed, are both deductible.
your deduction may be limited.
Employees' Pay Test 1ÐReasonableness Achievement awards. An achievement
award is an item of tangible personal propertyYou must be able to prove that the pay is rea-
that meets all the following requirements.sonable. Base this determination on the circum-
Introduction stances that exist when you contract for the • It is given to an employee for length of
services, not those that exist when the reasona-You can generally deduct the pay you give your service or safety achievement.
bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive,employees for the services they perform. The • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-the excess is disallowed for deduction.pay may be in cash, property, or services. It may entation.include wages, salaries, or other compensation
Factors to consider. Determine the reasona-such as vacation allowances, bonuses, commis- • It is awarded under conditions and circum-
bleness of pay by the facts and circumstances.sions, and fringe benefits. For information about stances that do not create a significant
Generally, reasonable pay is the amount thatdeducting employment taxes see chapter 5. likelihood of disguised pay.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

Page 7 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Length-of-service award. An award will Gifts of nominal value. If, to promote em- • Meals you furnish to your employees as
qualify as a length-of-service award only if either ployee goodwill, you distribute food or merchan- part of the expense of providing recrea-
of the following applies. dise of nominal value to your employees at tional or social activities, such as a com-
holidays, you can deduct the cost of these items pany picnic.• The employee receives the award after his as a nonwage business expense. Your deduc-or her first 5 years of employment. • Meals you are required by federal law totion for de minimis gifts of food or drink are not furnish to crew members of certain com-• The employee did not receive another subject to the 50% deduction limit that generally mercial vessels (or would be required tolength-of-service award (other than one of applies to meals. For more information on this furnish if the vessels were operated atvery small value) during the same year or deduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later. sea). This does not include meals you fur-in any of the prior 4 years. nish on vessels primarily providing luxury
Education Expenses water transportation.Safety achievement award. An award for
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve- • Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for
ment award unless one of the following applies. or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.an employee, you can deduct the payments if
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-they are part of a qualified educational assis-1. It is given to a manager, administrator, port camp that is near and integral to antance program. Deduct them on the ªEmployeeclerical employee, or other professional oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.benefit programsº or other appropriate line ofemployee. your tax return. For information on educational
2. During the tax year, more than 10% of assistance programs, see Educational Assis- Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-your employees, excluding those listed in tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B. efit programs include the following.(1), have already received a safety
• Accident and health plans.achievement award (other than one of very Fringe Benefits
small value). • Adoption assistance.
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-
• Cafeteria plans.Deduction limit. Your deduction for the ance of services. You can generally deduct the
cost of employee achievement awards given to cost of fringe benefits. • Dependent care assistance.any one employee during the tax year is limited You may be able to exclude all or part of the • Educational assistance.to the following. value of some fringe benefits from your employ-
ees' pay. You also may not owe employment • Life insurance coverage.• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan
taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. Seeawards. • Welfare benefit funds.Table 2-1, Special Rules for Various Types of
• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- Fringe Benefits, in Publication 15-B for details. You can generally deduct amounts you spendified plan awards. Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits on employee benefit programs on the applicablefor activities generally considered entertain- line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-A qualified plan award is an achievement ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility vide dependent care by operating a dependentaward given as part of an established written used in connection with such an activity (for care facility for your employees, deduct yourplan or program that does not favor highly com- example, a company aircraft) for certain officers, costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is salaries, etc.).A highly compensated employee is an em- limited.ployee who meets either of the following tests. Life insurance coverage. You cannot de-Certain fringe benefits are discussed next.
duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,See Publication 15-B for more details on these1. The employee was a 5% owner at any
an employee, or any person with a financialand other fringe benefits.time during the year or the preceding year.
interest in your business, if you are directly or
2. The employee received more than Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-
$110,000 in pay for the preceding year. the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.
employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefitgory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the mealsranked by pay for the preceding year. having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareyou furnish to employees as part of the cost ofAn award is not a qualified plan award if the benefits to your employees, independent con-goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,average cost of all the employee achievement tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsmotel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofawards given during the tax year (that would be are any benefits other than deferred compensa-furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesqualified plan awards except for this limit) is tion or transfers of restricted property.for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,more than $400. To figure this average cost, Your deduction for contributions to a welfareetc.ignore awards of nominal value. benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified costDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage Deduction limit on meals. You can gener- for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundbusiness expense on your return or business ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessschedule. meals to your employees. However, you can over to the next tax year.
deduct the full cost of the following meals.You may not owe employment taxes Generally, the fund's ªqualified costº is the
on the value of some achievement total of the following amounts, reduced by the• Meals whose value you include in an em-
awards you provide to an employee.
TIP after-tax income of the fund.ployee's wages.
See Publication 15-B.
• The cost you would have been able to• Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringe
deduct using the cash method of account-benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-
Bonuses ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.cation 15-B. This generally includes meals
you furnish to employees at your place of • The contributions added to a reserve ac-You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an business if more than half of these em- count that are needed to fund claims in-employee if you intended the bonus as addi- ployees are provided the meals for your curred but not paid as of the end of thetional pay for services, not as a gift, and the convenience. year. These claims can be for supplemen-services were performed. However, the total bo-
• Meals you furnish to your employees at tal unemployment benefits, severancenuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona-
the work site when you operate a restau- pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceble for the services performed. If the bonus is
rant or catering service.paid in property, see Property, later. benefits.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see sections 419(c) and the payment under a nonaccountable plan, de- it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. For
duct it as wages and include it in the employee's419A of the Internal Revenue Code and the examples of related persons, see Related per-
W-2.related regulations. sons in chapter 2, Publication 544.
See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and
Rent on your home. If you rent your homeEntertainment in chapter 11 for more informa-Loans or Advances and use part of it as your place of business, yoution about deducting reimbursements and an
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatexplanation of accountable and nonaccountableYou generally can deduct as wages an advance
part. You must meet the requirements for busi-plans.you make to an employee for services per-
ness use of your home. For more information,formed if you do not expect the employee to
see Business use of your home in chapter 1.repay the advance. However, if the employee Sick and Vacation Pay
performs no services, treat the amount you ad-
Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid invanced as a loan. If the employee does not Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to your trade or business is deductible in the yearrepay the loan, treat it as income to the em- your employees for sickness and injury, includ- paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, youployee. ing lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, can deduct only the amount that applies to youryour deduction is limited to amounts not com- use of the rented property during the tax year.Below-market interest rate loans. On cer- pensated by insurance or other means. You can deduct the rest of your payment onlytain loans you make to an employee or share- over the period to which it applies.Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employeeholder, you are treated as having received
benefit. It includes amounts paid for unusedinterest income and as having paid compensa- Example 1. You are a calendar year tax-vacation leave. You can deduct vacation paytion or dividends equal to that interest. See payer and you leased a building for 5 yearsonly in the tax year in which the employee actu-Below-Market Loans in chapter 4. beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year.ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of You paid the first year's rent ($12,000) on Junewhether you use the cash or accrual method ofProperty 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 ×  $12,000)accounting. for the rent that applies to the first year.If you transfer property (including your com-
pany's stock) to an employee as payment for Example 2. You are a calendar year tax-services, you can generally deduct it as wages. payer. Last January you leased property for 3The amount you can deduct is the property's fair years for $6,000 a year. You paid the full
market value on the date of the transfer less any $18,000 (3 ×  $6,000) during the first year of the
amount the employee paid for the property. lease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000,3.You can claim the deduction only for the tax the part of the lease that applies to that year.
year in which your employee includes the prop-
erty's value in income. Your employee is Canceling a lease. You generally can deduct
deemed to have included the value in income if as rent an amount you pay to cancel a businessRent Expense lease.you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.
 You treat the deductible amount as received
Lease or purchase. There may be instancesin exchange for the property, and you must rec-
Introduction in which you must determine whether your pay-ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer,
ments are for rent or for the purchase of theunless it is the company's stock transferred as This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent property. You must first determine whether yourpayment for services. Your gain or loss is the or lease payments you make for property you agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-difference between the fair market value of the use in your business but do not own. It also tract. Payments made under a conditional salesproperty and its adjusted basis on the date of discusses how to treat other kinds of payments contract are not deductible as rent expense.transfer. you make that are related to your use of this
property. These include payments you make for Conditional sales contract. Whether anThese rules also apply to property trans-
taxes on the property. agreement is a conditional sales contract de-ferred to an independent contractor for services,
pends on the intent of the parties. Determinegenerally reported on Form 1099-MISC.
intent based on the provisions of the agreementTopics
and the facts and circumstances that exist whenThis chapter discusses:Restricted property. If the property you
you make the agreement. No single test, ortransfer for services is subject to restrictions that
special combination of tests, always applies.• The definition of rentaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct it
However, in general, an agreement may be con-and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- • Taxes on leased property sidered a conditional sales contract rather thantially vested in the recipient. However, if the
a lease if any of the following is true.• The cost of getting a leaserecipient pays for the property, you must report
any gain at the time of the transfer up to the • The agreement applies part of each pay-• Improvements by the lesseeamount paid. ment toward an equity interest you will re-• Capitalizing rent expensesªSubstantially vestedº means the property is ceive.
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This • You get title to the property after you makemeans that the recipient is not likely to have to a stated amount of required payments.Rentgive up his or her rights in the property in the
future. • The amount you must pay to use the prop-
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of erty for a short time is a large part of the
property you do not own. In general, you can amount you would pay to get title to theReimbursements deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for property.for Business Expenses property you use in your trade or business. If you
• You pay much more than the current fairhave or will receive equity in or title to the prop-You can generally deduct the amount you pay or rental value of the property.erty, the rent is not deductible.reimburse employees for business expenses in-
• You have an option to buy the property atcurred for your business. However, your deduc- Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental a nominal price compared to the value oftion may be limited. deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the the property when you may exercise theIf you make the payment under an accounta- issue of reasonableness arises only if you and option. Determine this value when youble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related make the agreement.paid. For example, if you pay an employee for person is reasonable if it is the same amount
• You have an option to buy the property attravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
a nominal price compared to the totalthis payment as a travel expense. If you make property. Rent is not unreasonable just because
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount you have to pay under the agree- more than $250,000 and any of the following the real estate taxes in the later year when the
ment. apply. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for• The agreement designates part of the pay- • Rents increase during the lease. the taxes for that year.ments as interest, or that part is easy to • Rents decrease during the lease. Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes asrecognize as interest.
rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak's• Rents are deferred (rent is payable after
liability under the lease becomes fixed.Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- the end of the calendar year following the
actions may not be considered leases. Lever- calendar year in which the use occurs and Example 2. The facts are the same as inaged leases generally involve three parties: a the rent is allocated).
Example 1 except that, according to the terms oflessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estateUsually the lease term covers a large part of the the end of the calendar year preceding the taxes when the owner of the property becomesuseful life of the leased property, and the calendar year in which the use occurs and liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct thelessee's payments to the lessor are enough to the rent is allocated). real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for thecover the lessor's payments to the lender.
earlier year. This is the year in which Oak'sThese rules do not apply if your lease specifiesIf you plan to take part in what appears to be
liability under the lease becomes fixed.equal amounts of rent for each month in thea leveraged lease, you may want to get an
lease term and all rent payments are due in theadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on
calendar year to which the rent relates (or in thepage 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19
preceding or following calendar year).contains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter-
mine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal Cost of Getting a LeaseGenerally, if the special rules apply, you mustincome tax purposes. Revenue Procedure use an accrual method of accounting (and time2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internal You may either enter into a new lease with thevalue of money principles) for your rental ex-Revenue Bulletin provides the information re- lessor of the property or get an existing leasepenses, regardless of your overall method ofquired to be furnished in a request for an ad- from another lessee. Very often when you get anaccounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichvance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. existing lease from another lessee, you mustthe IRS has determined that a lease was de-Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at pay the previous lessee money to get the lease,signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takewww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf. besides having to pay the rent on the lease.rent and stated or imputed interest into accountIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 If you get an existing lease on property orunder a constant rental accrual method in whichprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only, equipment for your business, you generallythe rent is treated as accruing ratably over thethe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged must amortize any amount you pay to get thatentire lease term. For details, see section 467 oflease transaction to be the owner of the property lease over the remaining term of the lease. Forthe Internal Revenue Code.and the transaction to be a valid lease if all the example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and
factors in the revenue procedure are met, in- there are 10 years remaining on the lease with
cluding the following. no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each
year.• The lessor must maintain a minimum un- Taxes on
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi-conditional ªat riskº equity investment in
ble property is not subject to the amortizationthe property (at least 20% of the cost of Leased Property
the property) during the entire lease term. rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in
If you lease business property, you can deduct chapter 8.• The lessee may not have a contractual as additional rent any taxes you have to pay toright to buy the property from the lessor at or for the lessor. When you can deduct these Option to renew. The term of the lease forless than fair market value when the right taxes as additional rent depends on your ac- amortization includes all renewal options plusis exercised. counting method. any other period for which you and the lessor
• The lessee may not invest in the property, reasonably expect the lease to be renewed.
Cash method. If you use the cash method ofexcept as provided by Revenue Procedure However, this applies only if less than 75% of
accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-2001-28. the cost of getting the lease is for the term
tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay remaining on the purchase date (not including• The lessee may not lend any money to the them. any period for which you may choose to renew,lessor to buy the property or guarantee the extend, or continue the lease). Allocate theloan used by the lessor to buy the prop- Accrual method. If you use an accrual lease cost to the original term and any optionerty. method of accounting, you can deduct taxes as term based on the facts and circumstances. Inadditional rent for the tax year in which you can• The lessor must show that it expects to some cases, it may be appropriate to make thedetermine all the following.receive a profit apart from the tax deduc- allocation using a present value computation.
tions, allowances, credits, and other tax For more information, see Regulations section• That you have a liability for taxes on the
attributes. 1.178-1(b)(5).leased property.
• How much the liability is.The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue with 20 years remaining on it and two options to• That economic performance occurred.
Procedure 2012-1 available at renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid
www.irs.gov/irb/2012-01_IRB/ar06.html. $7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for theThe liability and amount of taxes are deter-
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less thanmined by state or local law and the lease agree-Leveraged leases of limited-use property. 75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (orment. Economic performance occurs as you useThe IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever- $7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30the property.aged leases of so-called limited-use property. years. That is the remaining life of your presentLimited-use property is property not expected to Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar lease plus the periods for renewal.be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofend of the lease term except for continued leas- Example 2. The facts are the same as inaccounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce- Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for theness. Under state law, owners of real propertydure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-become liable (incur a lien on the property) forproperty and property that is not limited-use tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 overreal estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofproperty. the 20-year remaining life of the original lease.that year. However, they do not have to pay
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease wasLeases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18
not less than 75% of the total cost of the leasevided for certain leases of tangible property. The months later) when tax bills are issued. Under
(or $7,500).rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost of a modification agreement. You may investment in the improvements over the recov-
have to pay an additional ªrentº amount over part ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
of the lease period to change certain provisions without regard to the lease term. 4.in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
ments and amortize them over the remaining
period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
ments as additional rent, even if they are de- InterestCapitalizingscribed as rent in the agreement.
Rent ExpensesExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer
and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building IntroductionUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you muststarting on January 1. However, before you oc-
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectcupy it, you decide that you really need less
ness interest expense. Business interest ex-space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent costs for certain production or resale activities.
pense is an amount charged for the use offrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release Include these costs in the basis of property you money you borrowed for business activities.the excess space from the original lease. In produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-
exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent ing them as a current deduction. You recover the Topicsamount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost This chapter discusses:ments of $50 each. of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseYou must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize dispose of the property. • Allocation of interestit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-
Indirect costs include amounts incurred fortization deduction each year will be $150 • Interest you can deduct
($3,000 ÷  20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.
• Interest you cannot deduct$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5
years as rent. • Capitalization of interestUniform capitalization rules. You may be
• When to deduct interestsubject to the uniform capitalization rules if youCommissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis-
do any of the following, unless the property issions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you • Below-market loans
produced for your use other than in a businesspay to get a lease on property you use in your
or an activity carried on for profit.business are capital costs. You must amortize Useful Itemsthese costs over the term of the lease.
1. Produce real property or tangible personal You may want to see:
property. For this purpose, tangible per-Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If you Publicationsonal property includes a film, sound re-sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you
cording, video tape, book, or similarbought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of ❏ 537 Installment Salesproperty.getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesand amortize it over the remaining term of the 2. Acquire property for resale.lease. ❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest DeductionHowever, these rules do not apply to the follow-
ing property. Form (and Instructions)
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized DeductionsImprovements your average annual gross receipts are
❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.by Lessee Income and Loss
2. Property you produce if you meet either of ❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share ofIf you add buildings or make other permanent the following conditions. Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.improvements to leased property, depreciate
the cost of the improvements using the modified a. Your indirect costs of producing the ❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder'saccelerated cost recovery system (MACRS). property are $200,000 or less. Share of Income, Deductions,Depreciate the property over its appropriate re- Credits, etc.b. You use the cash method of accountingcovery period. You cannot amortize the cost
and do not account for inventories. ❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statementover the remaining term of the lease.
If you do not keep the improvements when ❏ 3115 Application for Change in
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss based Accounting MethodExample 1. You rent construction equip-on your adjusted basis in the improvements at ment to build a storage facility. If you are subject ❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expensethat time. to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap- DeductionFor more information, see the discussion of italize as part of the cost of the building the rentMACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsyou paid for the equipment. You recover yourProperty.
cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation on See chapter 12 for information about getting
the building. publications and forms.Assignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee
who makes permanent improvements to land
Example 2. You rent space in a facility tolater assigns all lease rights to you for money
conduct your business of manufacturing tools. Ifand you pay the rent required by the lease, the
you are subject to the uniform capitalizationamount you pay for the assignment is a capital Allocation of Interest
rules, you must include the rent you paid toinvestment. If the rental value of the leased land
increased since the lease began, part of your occupy the facility in the cost of the tools you The rules for deducting interest vary, depending
capital investment is for that increase in the on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-produce.
rental value. The rest is for your investment in ness, personal, or investment activities. If you
the permanent improvements. use the proceeds of a loan for more than one
More information. For more information on type of expense, you must allocate the interestThe part that is for the increased rental value
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in based on the use of the loan's proceeds.of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-amortize it over the remaining term of the lease. Allocate your interest expense to the follow-
nal Revenue Code section 263A.You can depreciate the part that is for your ing categories.
Page 10 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 11 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Nonpassive trade or business activity in- Under the interest allocation rules, the entire after the proceeds are received in cash or de-
$100,000 loan is treated as property held forterest posited in your account.
investment for the period from January 4 If the loan proceeds are deposited in an• Passive trade or business activity interest through April 1. From April 2 through September account, you can apply this rule even if the rules
• Investment interest 3, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as used stated earlier under Order of funds spent would
in the passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as• Portfolio interest property held for investment. From September 4 used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to• Personal interest through December 31, she must treat $40,000 any payments, disregard those payments (andof the loan as used for personal purposes, the proceeds from which they are made) whenIn general, you allocate interest on a loan the $20,000 as used in the passive activity, andsame way you allocate the loan proceeds. You applying the rules stated under Order of funds$40,000 as property held for investment.allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- spent.
Order of funds spent. Generally, you treatments to specific uses. If you received the loan proceeds in cash,
loan proceeds deposited in an account as used you can treat the payment as made on the date
(spent) before either of the following amounts.The easiest way to trace disburse- you received the cash instead of the date you
ments to specific uses is to keep the actually made the payment.• Any unborrowed amounts held in theproceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP same account.from any other funds. Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on
• Any amounts deposited after these loanSecured loan. The allocation of loan pro- August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.proceeds.ceeds and the related interest is not generally Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
affected by the use of property that secures the 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the
loan. Example. On January 9, Edith opened a account for a passive activity expense. Also,
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro- Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits other
Example. You secure a loan with property ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the
used in your business. You use the loan pro- funds. The following table shows the transac- same period. Regardless of these other transac-
ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use. tions in her account during the tax year. tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit heYou must allocate interest expense on the loan made on August 18 as being paid on August 4to personal use (purchase of the automobile) Date Transaction from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank caneven though the loan is secured by business treat the passive activity expense he paid onJanuary 9 $500 proceeds of Loan Aproperty. and $1,000 unborrowed August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-
funds depositedIf the property that secures the loan is ceeds treated as deposited in the account.
your home, you generally do not allo- January 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B Optional method for determining date ofcate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP deposited reallocation. You can use the followinginterest. The interest is usually deductible as method to determine the date loan proceeds areFebruary 19 $800 used for personalqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of reallocated to another use. You can treat allpurposeshow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor- payments from loan proceeds in the accountmation, see Publication 936. February 27 $700 used for passive during any month as taking place on the later ofactivity
the following dates.Allocation period. The period for which a June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C 
• The first day of that month.loan is allocated to a particular use begins on the deposited
date the proceeds are used and ends on the • The date the loan proceeds are depositedNovember 20 $800 used for anearlier of the following dates. in the account.investment
• The date the loan is repaid. December 18 $600 used for personal However, you can use this optional method only
purposes if you treat all payments from the account during• The date the loan is reallocated to another
use. the same calendar month in the same way.Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan Interest on a segregated account. If you
A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheProceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even have an account that contains only loan pro-
treats the $700 used for a passive activity asif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a ceeds and interest earned on the account, you
made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofthird party, the allocation of the loan is still based can treat any payment from that account as
Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. Sheon your use of the funds. This applies whether being made first from the interest. When the
treats the $800 used for an investment as madeyou pay for property, services, or anything else interest earned is used up, any remaining pay-
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsby incurring a loan, or you take property subject ments are from loan proceeds.the $600 used for personal purposes as madeto a debt.
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used
and $400 of unborrowed funds.Proceeds deposited in borrower's account. the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings
For the periods during which loan proceedsTreat loan proceeds deposited in an account as account. When the account had earned interestare held in the account, Edith treats them asproperty held for investment. It does not matter of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-property held for investment.whether the account pays interest. Any interest poses. You can treat the withdrawal as comingyou pay on the loan is investment interest ex- first from the interest earned on the account,Payments from checking accounts. Gen-pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, erally, you treat a payment from a checking or $867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133you must reallocate the loan based on the use of similar account as made at the time the check is ($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on thethe funds. written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within loan from the time it was deposited in the ac-
a reasonable period after you write it. You can count until the time of the withdrawal is invest-Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax- treat checks written on the same day as written ment interest expense. The interest charged onpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im- in any order. the part of the proceeds used for personal pur-mediately uses the proceeds to open a checking
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew itaccount. No other amounts are deposited in the Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-
until you either repay it or reallocate it to anotheraccount during the year and no part of the loan ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
use is personal interest expense. The interestprincipal is repaid during the year. On April 2, ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat
charged on the loan proceeds you left in theConnie uses $20,000 from the checking account any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)
account ($867) continues to be investment inter-for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem- made from any account you own, or from cash,
est expense until you either repay it or reallocateber 4, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from as made from those proceeds. This applies to
the account for personal purposes. it to another use.any payment made within 30 days before or
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Loan repayment. When you repay any part of interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow- You generally deduct OID over the term of
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as ing requirements. the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year
being repaid in the following order. using the constant-yield method, unless the OID• You are legally liable for that debt. on the loan is de minimis.
1. Personal use. • Both you and the lender intend that the De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if itdebt be repaid.2. Investments and passive activities (other is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the
than those included in (3)). • You and the lender have a true stated redemption price of the loan at maturity
debtor-creditor relationship. multiplied by the number of full years from the3. Passive activities in connection with a
date of original issue to maturity (the term of therental real estate activity in which you ac-
loan).tively participate. Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose onebusiness debt, you can deduct only your share4. Former passive activities. of the following ways to figure the amount youof the total interest paid or accrued.
5. Trade or business use and expenses for can deduct each year.
certain low-income housing projects. Example. You and your brother borrow • On a constant-yield basis over the term ofmoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. You the loan.use your half of the loan in your business, andLine of credit (continuous borrowings).
• On a straight-line basis over the term ofyou make one-half of the loan payments. YouThe following rules apply if you have a line of
the loan.can deduct your half of the total interest pay-credit or similar arrangement.
ments as a business deduction. • In proportion to stated interest payments.1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.accrues at the same fixed or variable rate Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid
as a single loan. or accrued on real estate you own legally or You make this choice by deducting the OID in aequitably is deductible. However, rather than manner consistent with the method chosen on2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed deducting the interest currently, you may have your timely filed tax return for the tax year infunds on which interest accrues at different to add it to the cost basis of the property as which the loan is issued.fixed or variable rates as different loans. explained later under Capitalization of Interest.Treat these loans as repaid in the order
Example. On January 1, 2011, you took outshown on the loan agreement. Statement. If you paid $600 or more of
a $100,000 discounted loan and receivedmortgage interest (including certain points) dur-
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature oning the year on any one mortgage, you generallyLoan refinancing. Allocate the replacement January 1, 2021 (a 10-year term), and thewill receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-You will receive the statement if you pay interestwas allocated. Make the allocation only to the est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of eachto a person (including a financial institution or aextent you use the proceeds of the new loan to year, beginning January 1, 2012. The $1,500cooperative housing corporation) in the courserepay any part of the original loan. OID on the loan is de minimis because it is lessof that person's trade or business. A govern-
than $2,500 ($100,000 ×  .0025 ×  10). Youmental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingDebt-financed distribution. A debt-financed choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basisthe statement.distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor- over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2011, youIf you receive a refund of interest you over-poration borrows funds and allocates those can deduct $150 each year for 10 years.paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-funds to distributions made to partners or share-
ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotholders. The manner in which you report the Constant-yield method. If the OID is not dededuct this amount. For information on how tointerest expense associated with the distributed minimis, you must use the constant-yieldreport this refund, see Refunds of interest laterdebt proceeds depends on your use of those method to figure how much you can deduct eachin this chapter.proceeds. year. You figure your deduction for the first year
using the following steps.Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.How to report. If the proceeds were used in
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgagea nonpassive trade or business activity, report 1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen-cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28; erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan.penses, which include mortgage commissions,enter ªinterest expenseº and the name of the If you paid points on the loan (as dis-abstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalpartnership or S corporation in column (a) and cussed later), the issue price generally isexpenses. If the property mortgaged is businessthe amount in column (h). If the proceeds were the difference between the proceeds andor income-producing property, you can amortizeused in a passive activity, follow the Instructions the points.the costs over the life of the mortgage.for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield totions, to determine the amount of interest ex- Prepayment penalty. If you pay off your maturity.pense that can be reported on Schedule E mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for
(Form 1040), line 28; enter ªinterest expenseº doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter- 3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-and the name of the partnership in column (a) est. ments from the result in (2). This is theand the amount in column (f). If the proceeds OID you can deduct in the first year.were used in an investment activity, enter the Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-
To figure your deduction in any subsequentinterest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are used terest charged on employment taxes assessed
year, follow the above steps, except determinefor personal purposes, the interest is generally on your business is deductible.
the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get thenot deductible.
adjusted issue price, add to the issue price anyOriginal issue discount (OID). OID is a form
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-
and (3) above.erally has OID when its proceeds are less than
its principal amount. The OID is the difference The yield to maturity is generally shown inInterest You
between the stated redemption price at maturity the literature you receive from your lender. If you
and the issue price of the loan.Can Deduct do not have this information, consult your lender
 A loan's stated redemption price at maturity or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is
You can generally deduct as a business ex- is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest) the discount rate that, when used in computing
pense all interest you pay or accrue during the payable on it other than qualified stated interest. the present value of all principal and interest
tax year on debts related to your trade or busi- Qualified stated interest is stated interest that is payments, produces an amount equal to the
ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if unconditionally payable in cash or property principal amount of the loan.
you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or (other than another loan of the issuer) at least
business expense. It does not matter what type annually over the term of the loan at a single Example. The facts are the same as in the
of property secures the loan. You can deduct fixed rate. previous example, except that you deduct the
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi- Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.OID on a constant yield basis over the term of
You can generally deduct the interest if the con-nal lender. If you use the cash method ofthe loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is
tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and theaccounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2011,
covered individual is someone other than anwith funds borrowed from the original lenderyou can deduct $93 [($98,500 ×  .102467) −
employee, officer, or someone financially inter-through a second loan, an advance, or any other$10,000]. For 2012, you can deduct $103
ested in your business. If the contract was pur-[($98,593 ×  .102467) − $10,000]. arrangement similar to a loan. You can deduct
chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallythe interest expense once you start making pay-Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or deduct the interest no matter who is covered byments on the new loan.mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any the contract.When you make a payment on the new loan,remaining OID in the tax year in which the loan
you first apply the payment to interest and then Interest allocated to unborrowed policyor mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end
to the principal. All amounts you apply to the cash value. Corporations and partnershipsdue to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,
interest on the first loan are deductible, along generally cannot deduct any interest expenseor similar event.
with any interest you pay on the second loan, allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-If you refinance with the original lender, subject to any limits that apply. surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. Thisyou generally cannot deduct the re- rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,maining OID in the year in which the
CAUTION
! Capitalized interest. You cannot currently 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- deduct interest you are required to capitalize director, employee, or 20% owner. For moreduct it over the term of the new mortgage or under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi- information, see section 264(f) of the Internalloan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy Revenue Code.original lender under Interest You Cannot De- property and pay interest owed by the seller (forduct, later. example, by assuming the debt and any interest
Points. The term ªpointsº is used to describe accrued on the property), you cannot deduct the
certain charges paid, or treated as paid, by a interest. Add this interest to the basis of the Capitalization
borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. These property.
charges are also called loan origination fees, of Interest
maximum loan charges, discount points, or pre- Commitment fees or standby charges.
mium charges. If any of these charges (points) Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-Fees you incur to have business funds available
are solely for the use of money, they are interest. erally must capitalize interest on debt equal toon a standby basis, but not for the actual use of
Because points are prepaid interest, you your expenditures to produce real property orthe funds, are not deductible as interest pay-
generally cannot deduct the full amount in the certain tangible personal property. The propertyments. You may be able to deduct them as
year paid. However, you can choose to fully must be produced by you for use in your trade orbusiness expenses.
deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain business or for sale to customers. You cannotIf the funds are for inventory or certain prop-tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see capitalize interest related to property that youerty used in your business, the fees are indirectPublication 936. acquire in any other manner.costs and you generally must capitalize themThe points reduce the issue price of the loan Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-and result in original issue discount (OID), de- duction period must be capitalized if the propertytalization of Interest, later.ductible as explained in the preceding discus- produced is designated property. Designated
sion. property is any of the following.Interest on income tax. Interest charged on
income tax assessed on your individual income • Real property.Partial payments on a nontax debt. If you tax return is not a business deduction evenmake partial payments on a debt (other than a • Tangible personal property with a class lifethough the tax due is related to income fromdebt owed the IRS), the payments are applied, of 20 years or more.your trade or business. Treat this interest as ain general, first to interest and any remainder to business deduction only in figuring a net operat- • Tangible personal property with an esti-principal. You can deduct only the interest. This ing loss deduction. mated production period of more than 2rule does not apply when it can be inferred that
years.the borrower and lender understood that a differ- Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-
ent allocation of the payments would be made. cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter- • Tangible personal property with an esti-
est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, you mated production period of more than 1Installment purchase. If you make an install- cannot deduct any fines or penalties. year if the estimated cost of production isment purchase of business property, the con- more than $1 million.tract between you and the seller generally Interest on loans with respect to life insur-
provides for the payment of interest. If no inter- ance policies. You generally cannot deduct Property you produce. You produce propertyest or a low rate of interest is charged under the interest on a debt incurred with respect to any if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-contract, a portion of the stated principal amount life insurance, annuity, or endowment contract velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatpayable under the contract may be recharacter- that covers any individual unless that individual property produced for you under a contract asized as interest (unstated interest). The amount is a key person. produced by you up to the amount you pay orrecharacterized as interest reduces your basis If the policy or contract covers a key person, incur for the property.in the property and increases your interest ex- you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofpense. For more information on installment Carrying charges. Carrying charges includedebt for that person. However, the deduction forsales and unstated interest, see Publication taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate orany month cannot be more than the interest537. to carry, transport, or install personal property.figured using Moody's Composite Yield on Sea-
You can choose to capitalize carrying chargessoned Corporate Bonds (formerly known as
not subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifMoody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver-
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-age-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody'sInterest You mation, see chapter 7.rate) for that month.
Who is a key person? A key person is an Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter-Cannot Deduct
officer or 20% owner. However, the number of est as a cost of the property produced. You
individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. recover your interest when you sell or use the
ited to the greater of the following.In addition, certain other expenses that may property. If the property is inventory, recover
seem to be interest but are not, cannot be de- capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If• Five individuals.ducted as interest. the property is used in your trade or business,
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers andYou cannot currently deduct interest that recover capitalized interest through an adjust-
employees of the company or 20 individu-must be capitalized, and you generally cannot ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or
als.deduct personal interest. other method.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Partnerships and S corporations. The inter- However, if you contest but pay the pro- of the main purposes of the interest ar-
est capitalization rules are applied first at the posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do rangement).
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesthen applied at the partners' or shareholders' the interest is deductible in the year paid. under a continuing care contract (made af-level to the extent the partnership or S corpora- Related person. If you use an accrual ter October 11, 1985).tion has insufficient debt to support the produc- method, you cannot deduct interest owed to ation or construction costs. Except as noted in (5) above, these rulesrelated person who uses the cash method until apply to demand loans (loans payable in full atIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you payment is made and the interest is includible in any time upon the lender's demand) outstandingmay have to capitalize interest you incur during the gross income of that person. The relation- after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatthe tax year for the production costs of the part- ship is determined as of the end of the tax year are not demand loans) made after that date.nership or S corporation. You may also have to for which the interest would otherwise be de-
capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve- Treatment of gift and demand loans. If youS corporation for your own production costs. To nue Code for more information. receive a below-market gift loan or demandproperly capitalize interest under these rules,
loan, you are treated as receiving an additionalyou must be given the required information in an
payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive
forgone interest on the loan. You are thenfrom the partnership or S corporation. Below-Market Loans treated as transferring this amount back to the
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-Additional information. The procedures for If you receive a below-market gift or demand ered to occur annually, generally on Decemberapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be- loan and use the proceeds in your trade or 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade oryond the scope of this publication. For more business, you may be able to deduct the forgone business, you can deduct the forgone interestinformation, see sections 1.263A-8 through interest. See Treatment of gift and demand each year as a business interest expense. The1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. loans later in this discussion. lender must report it as interest income.Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2.
A below-market loan is a loan on which no Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofinterest is charged or on which interest is $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-charged at a rate below the applicable federal viduals, forgone interest treated as transferredrate. A gift or demand loan that is a be-When To back to the lender is limited to the borrower's netlow-market loan generally is considered an
investment income for the year. This limit ap-arm's-length transaction in which you, the bor-Deduct Interest plies if the outstanding loans between the lenderrower, are considered as having received both
and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor-the following.If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed rower's net investment income is $1,000 or less,
under Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do not • A loan in exchange for a note that requires it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a
apply to you, deduct interest as follows. the payment of interest at the applicable loan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one of
federal rate. the main purposes of the interest arrangement.Cash method. Under the cash method, you • An additional payment in an amount equalcan generally deduct only the interest you actu- Treatment of term loans. If you receive ato the forgone interest.ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct below-market term loan other than a gift or de-a promissory note you gave as payment be- The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi- mand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual dend, contribution to capital, payment of com- tional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on thepayment. pensation, or other payment, depending on the date the loan is made. This payment is equal to
substance of the transaction. the loan amount minus the present value, at thePrepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
applicable federal rate, of all payments dueduct any interest paid before the year it is due. Forgone interest. under the loan. The same amount is treated asInterest paid in advance can be deducted only in
For any period, forgone interest is: original issue discount on the loan. See Originalthe tax year in which it is due.
issue discount (OID)  under Interest You Can1. The interest that would be payable for thatDiscounted loan. If interest or a discount is Deduct, earlier.period if interest accrued on the loan at thesubtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a
applicable federal rate and was payablepayment of interest and you cannot deduct it Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. Theannually on December 31,when you get the loan. For more information, rules for below-market loans do not apply to anyminussee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest day on which the total outstanding loans be-
You Can Deduct, earlier. tween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or2. Any interest actually payable on the loan
less. This exception applies only to the follow-for the period.Refunds of interest. If you pay interest and
ing.then receive a refund in the same tax year of any
Applicable federal rates are publishedpart of the interest, reduce your interest deduc- 1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan isby the IRS each month in the Internaltion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a not directly used to buy or carry in-Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenuelater tax year, include the refund in your income
TIP come-producing assets.Bulletins are available on the IRS web site atto the extent the deduction for the interest re-
www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRSduced your tax. 2. Compensation-related loans or corpora-
office to get these rates. tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of
Accrual method. Under an accrual method, any federal tax is not a principal purpose ofLoans subject to the rules. The rules for be-
you can deduct only interest that has accrued the interest arrangement.low-market loans apply to the following.
during the tax year. This exception does not apply to a term loan1. Gift loans (below-market loans where thePrepaid interest. See Prepaid interest, described in (2) above that was previously sub-forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).above. ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules
2. Compensation-related loans (be- will continue to apply even if the outstandingDiscounted loan. See Discounted loan, low-market loans between an employer balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.above. and an employee or between an indepen-
Exceptions for loans without significant taxTax deficiency. If you contest a federal in- dent contractor and a person for whom the
effect. The following loans are specifically ex-come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue contractor provides services).
empted from the rules for below-market loansuntil the tax year the final determination of liabil- 3. Corporation-shareholder loans. because their interest arrangements do notity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-then the interest accrues in the year the tax was 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loans
ity of the borrower or the lender.asserted and agreed to by you. where the avoidance of federal tax is one
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Loans made available by lenders to the b. assisted living or nursing facility avail- Form (and Instructions)
general public on the same terms and con- able in the continuing care facility.
❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsditions that are consistent with the lender's
3. The individual or individual's spouse will becustomary business practices. ❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment
provided with assisted living or nursing Tax2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or care available in the continuing care facil-municipal government that are made avail- ❏ 3115 Application for Change inity, as required for the health of the individ-able under a program of general applica- Accounting Methodual or the individual's spouse.tion to the public.
For more information, see section 7872(h) of See chapter 12 for information about getting3. Certain employee-relocation loans. the Internal Revenue Code. publications and forms.
4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
unless the interest income would be effec- Sale or exchange of property. Different rulestively connected with the conduct of a U.S. generally apply to a loan connected with the saletrade or business and not exempt from When Toor exchange of property. If the loan does notU.S. tax under an income tax treaty. provide adequate stated interest, part of the
Deduct Taxes5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show principal payment may be considered interest.
that the interest arrangement has no signif- However, there are exceptions that may require
Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearicant effect on the federal tax liability of the you to apply the below-market interest rate rules
you pay them. This applies whether you use thelender or the borrower. Whether an inter- to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-
cash method or an accrual method of account-est arrangement has a significant effect on nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
ing.the federal tax liability of the lender or the
Under an accrual method, you can deduct aborrower will be determined by all the facts More information. For more information on tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptionand circumstances. Consider all the follow- below-market loans, see section 7872 of the for recurring items discussed under Economicing factors. Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5 of Performance in Publication 538. You can also
the regulations.a. Whether items of income and deduction elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis-
generated by the loan offset each other. cussed later under Real Estate Taxes.
b. The amount of the items. Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic-
tion can require the use of a date for accruingc. The cost of complying with the be-
taxes that is earlier than the date it originallylow-market loan provisions if they were
required. However, if you use an accrualto apply.
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay5.d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for it, use the original accrual date for the year ofstructuring the transaction as a be- change and all future years to determine whenlow-market loan. you can deduct the tax.
Taxes Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-
sonal property used in a trade or business con-Exception for loans to qualified continuing
ducted in the state. This tax is assessed andcare facilities. The below-market interest
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). Inrules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualified Introduction 2011, the state changed the assessment andcontinuing care facility under a continuing care
You can deduct various federal, state, local, and lien dates from July 1, 2012, to December 31,contract if the lender or lender's spouse is age
foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade or 2011, for property tax year 2012. Use the origi-62 or older by the end of the calendar year.
business as business expenses. nal accrual date (July 1, 2012) to determineA qualified continuing care facility is one or when you can deduct the tax. You must also usemore facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet- You cannot deduct federal income the July 1 accrual date for all future years toing the requirements listed below. taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state determine when you can deduct the tax.inheritance, legacy, and succession
CAUTION
!
1. Designed to provide services under contin- taxes. Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi-uing care contracts (defined below).
talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who
2. Includes an independent living unit, and Topics produce real property or tangible personal prop-
either an assisted living or nursing facility, erty for use in a trade or business or for sale toThis chapter discusses:or both. customers. They also apply to certain taxpayers
who acquire property for resale. Under these• When to deduct taxes3. Substantially all of the independent living
rules, you either include certain costs in inven-unit residents are covered by continuing • Real estate taxes tory or capitalize certain expenses related to thecare contracts.
property, such as taxes. For more information,• Income taxesA continuing care contract is a written con- see chapter 1.• Employment taxestract between an individual and a qualified con-
tinuing care facility that includes all of the Carrying charges. Carrying charges include• Other taxesfollowing conditions. taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or
to carry, transport, or install personal property.1. The individual or individual's spouse must Useful Items You can elect to capitalize carrying charges notbe entitled to use the facility for the rest of subject to the uniform capitalization rules if theyYou may want to see:their life or lives. are otherwise deductible. For more information,
see chapter 7.2. The individual or individual's spouse will be Publication
provided with housing, as appropriate for
Refunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guidethe health of the individual or individual's
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-spouse in an: ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business clude the refund in income to the extent the
a. independent living unit (which has addi- deduction reduced your federal income tax in❏ 510 Excise Taxes
tional available facilities outside the unit the earlier year. For more information, see Re-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsfor the provision of meals and other per- covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule)  in
sonal care), and ❏ 551 Basis of Assets chapter 1.
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must include in income any inter- taxes, you are considered to have accrued your 29, 2010, see Revenue Procedure 2011-14,
est you receive on tax refunds. 2011-4 I.R.B. 330, available at part of the tax on the date you sell the property.
www.irs.gov/irb/2011-04IRB/ar08.html.
TIP
Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual
method taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm
County. He has not elected to ratably accrue
property taxes. November 30 of each year is the Income Taxes
assessment and lien date for the current realReal Estate Taxes property tax year, which is the calendar year. He This section discusses federal, state, local, and
sold the property on June 30, 2011. Under his foreign income taxes.Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, accounting method he would not be able toor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the Federal income taxes. You cannot deductclaim a deduction for the taxes because the salegeneral public welfare. The taxing authority federal income taxes.occurred before November 30. He is treated asmust base the taxes on the assessed value of having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- State and local income taxes. A corporationthe real estate and charge them uniformly ary 1±June 29), on June 30, and he can deduct or partnership can deduct state and local in-against all property under its jurisdiction. De- it for 2011. come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-ductible real estate taxes generally do not in- nership as business expenses. An individualclude taxes charged for local benefits and Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac- can deduct state and local income taxes only asimprovements that increase the value of the crual method, you can elect to accrue real estate an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formproperty. See Taxes for local benefits, later. tax related to a definite period ratably over that 1040).If you use an accrual method, you generally period. However, an individual can deduct a statecannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay tax on gross income (as distinguished from netthem to the government authority. However, you Example. John Smith is a calendar year income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during the taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real ness as a business expense.year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later. estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,
Accrual of contested income taxes. If you2011, to June 30, 2012, are $1,200. July 1 is theTaxes for local benefits. Generally, you can- use an accrual method, and you contest a stateassessment and lien date.not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and or local income tax liability, you must accrue andIf John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,improvements that tend to increase the value of deduct any contested amount in the tax year in$600 will accrue in 2011 ($1,200 ×  6/12, Julyyour property. These include assessments for which the liability is finally determined.1±December 31) and the balance will accrue instreets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, If additional state or local income taxes for a2012.and public parking facilities. You should in- prior year are assessed in a later year, you can
crease the basis of your property by the amount Separate elections. You can elect to rata- deduct the taxes in the year in which they were
of the assessment. bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil-
You can deduct taxes for these local benefits business and for nonbusiness activities if you ity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in
only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or account for them separately. Once you elect to the year in which the liability is finally deter-
interest charges related to those benefits. If part ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use mined.
of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest, that method unless you get permission from the The filing of an income tax return is notyou must be able to show how much of the tax is IRS to change. See Form 3115, later. considered a contest and, in the ab-for these expenses to claim a deduction for that Making the election. If you elect to ratably sence of an overt act of protest, you
TIPpart of the tax. accrue the taxes for the first year in which you can deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement to can deduct any additional taxes in the prior yearExample. To improve downtown commer-
your income tax return for that year. The state- if you do not show some affirmative evidence ofcial business, Waterfront City converted a down-
ment should show all the following items. denial of the liability.town business area street into an enclosed
pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full cost However, if you consistently deduct addi-• The trades or businesses to which the
of construction, financed with 10-year bonds, tional assessments in the year they are paid orelection applies and the accounting
against the affected properties. The city is pay- finally determined (including those for whichmethod or methods used.
ing the principal and interest with the annual there was no contest), you must continue to do
• The period to which the taxes relate.payments made by the property owners. so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier
The assessments for construction costs are year unless you receive permission to change• The computation of the real estate tax de-
not deductible as taxes or as business ex- your method of accounting. For more informa-duction for that first year.
penses, but are depreciable capital expenses. tion on accounting methods, see When Can I
The part of the payments used to pay the inter- Deduct an Expense in chapter 1.Generally, you must file your return by the due
est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes. date (including extensions). However, if you Foreign income taxes. Generally, you cantimely filed your return for the year without elect- take either a deduction or a credit for incomeCharges for services. Water bills, sewerage, ing to ratably accrue, you can still make the taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or aand other service charges assessed against election by filing an amended return within 6 U.S. possession. However, an individual cannotyour business property are not real estate taxes, months after the due date of the return (exclud- take a deduction or credit for foreign incomebut are deductible as business expenses. ing extensions). Attach the statement to the taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S.amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to tax under the foreign earned income exclusionPurchase or sale of real estate. If real estate section 301.9100-2º on the statement. File the or the foreign housing exclusion. For informationis sold, the real estate taxes must be allocated amended return at the same address where you on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Taxbetween the buyer and the seller. filed the original return. Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident AliensThe buyer and seller must allocate the real
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,estate taxes according to the number of days in Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue
see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-the real property tax year (the period to which real estate taxes for a year after the first year in
viduals.the tax imposed relates) that each owned the which you incur real estate taxes, or if you want
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up to revoke your election to ratably accrue real
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the estate taxes, file Form 3115. For more informa-
buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the tion, including applicable time frames for filing,
date of sale. You can usually find this informa- see the Instructions for Form 3115. Employment Taxes
tion on the settlement statement you received at
Note. If you are filing an application for aclosing. If you have employees, you must withhold vari-
change in accounting method filed after JanuaryIf you (the seller) use an accrual method and ous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em-
9, 2011, for a year of change ending after Aprilhave not elected to ratably accrue real estate ployers must withhold their employees' share of
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
social security and Medicare taxes along with Do not deduct state and local sales Form (and Instructions)
state and federal income taxes. You may also taxes imposed on the buyer that you
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnneed to pay certain employment taxes from your must collect and pay over to the state
CAUTION
!
own funds. These include your share of social or local government. Also, do not include these
See chapter 12 for information about gettingsecurity and Medicare taxes as an employer, taxes in gross receipts or sales.
publications and forms.along with unemployment taxes.
Your deduction for wages paid is not re- Self-employment tax. You can deduct part of
duced by the social security, medicare, and in- your self-employment tax as a business ex-
come taxes you withhold from your employees. pense in figuring your adjusted gross income. Deductible PremiumsYou can deduct the employment taxes you must This deduction only affects your income tax. It
pay from your own funds as taxes. does not affect your net earnings from You generally can deduct premiums you pay forself-employment or your self-employment tax. the following kinds of insurance related to yourExample. You pay your employee $18,000 To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line trade or business. a year. However, after you withhold various 27, the amount shown on the Deduction fortaxes, your employee receives $14,500. You 1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-employer-equivalent portion of self-employmentalso pay an additional $1,500 in employment cident, or similar losses.tax line of Schedule SE (Form 1040).taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as
For more information on self-employmentwages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from
tax, see Publication 334.your own funds as taxes. business bad debts.
For more information on employment taxes, 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-see Publication 15 (Circular E). ance for employees, including long-term
care insurance.Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,
you may have to make payments to a state a. If a partnership pays accident and
unemployment compensation fund or to a state health insurance premiums for its part-
6.disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments ners, it generally can deduct them as
as taxes. guaranteed payments to partners.
b. If an S corporation pays accident and
health insurance premiums for itsInsurance
more-than-2% shareholder-employees,Other Taxes it generally can deduct them, but must
also include them in the shareholder'sThe following are other taxes you can deduct if wages subject to federal income taxWhat's Newyou incur them in the ordinary course of your withholding. See Publication 15-B.trade or business.
Self-employed health insurance deduction. 4. Liability insurance.For tax years beginning after 2010, you cannotExcise taxes. You can deduct as a business
deduct any self-employed health insurance de- 5. Malpractice insurance that covers yourexpense all excise taxes that are ordinary and
duction you report on Form 1040, line 29, from personal liability for professional negli-necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or
self-employment earnings. gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.
tients or clients.
Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporate 6. Workers' compensation insurance set byfranchise taxes as a business expense. state law that covers any claims for bodily
Introduction injuries or job-related diseases suffered byFuel taxes. Generally, taxes on gasoline, die- employees in your business, regardless ofYou generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-sel fuel, and other motor fuels that you use in fault.essary cost of insurance as a business expenseyour business are included as part of the cost of
the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa- if it is for your trade, business, or profession. a. If a partnership pays workers' compen-rate item. However, you may have to capitalize certain sation premiums for its partners, it gen-insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationYou may be entitled to a credit or refund for erally can deduct them as guaranteed
rules. For more information, see Capitalizedfederal excise tax you paid on fuels used for payments to partners.
Premiums, later.certain purposes. For more information, see
b. If an S corporation pays workers' com-Publication 510.
pensation premiums for itsTopics
more-than-2% shareholder-employees,Occupational taxes. You can deduct as a This chapter discusses: it generally can deduct them, but mustbusiness expense an occupational tax charged
also include them in the shareholder'sat a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of • Deductible premiums wages.working or conducting a business in the locality.
• Nondeductible premiums
7. Contributions to a state unemployment in-Personal property tax. You can deduct any • Capitalized premiums surance fund are deductible as taxes iftax imposed by a state or local government on
• When to deduct premiums they are considered taxes under state law.personal property used in your trade or busi-
ness. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business
overhead expenses you have during longUseful ItemsSales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a periods of disability caused by your injuryYou may want to see:service or on the purchase or use of property as or sickness.part of the cost of the service or property. If the
Publicationservice or the cost or use of the property is a 9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-
deductible business expense, you can deduct ers vehicles used in your business for lia-❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringethe tax as part of that service or cost. If the bility, damages, and other losses. If youBenefitsproperty is merchandise bought for resale, the operate a vehicle partly for personal use,
sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income deduct only the part of the insurance pre-
the property is depreciable, add the sales tax to mium that applies to the business use of❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsthe basis for depreciation. For more information the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftson basis, see Publication 551. age rate to figure your car expenses, you
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cannot deduct any car insurance premi- • For more-than-2% shareholders, a policy Qualified long-term care services. Quali-
can be either in the name of the S corpo- fied long-term care services are:ums.
ration or in the name of the shareholder. • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-10. Life insurance covering your officers and You can either pay the premiums yourself peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-employees if you are not directly or indi- or your S corporation can pay them and habilitative services, andrectly a beneficiary under the contract. report the premium amounts on Form W-2
• Maintenance or personal care services.as wages to be included in your gross11. Business interruption insurance that pays
income. However, if the policy is in yourfor lost profits if your business is shut down The services must be required by a chronically illname and you pay the premiums yourself,due to a fire or other cause. individual and prescribed by a licensed healththe S corporation must reimburse you and care practitioner.report the premium amounts on Form W-2
Self-Employed Health Chronically ill individual. A chronically illas wages to be included in your gross
individual is a person who has been certified asincome. Otherwise, the insurance plan willInsurance Deduction
one of the following.not be considered to be established under
You may be able to deduct premiums paid for your business. • An individual who has been unable, due tomedical and dental insurance and qualified loss of functional capacity for at least 90long-term care insurance for yourself, your Medicare premiums you voluntarily pay to ob- days, to perform at least two activities ofspouse, and your dependents. The insurance tain insurance in your name that is similar to daily living without substantial assistancecan also cover your child who was under age 27 qualifying private health insurance can be used from another individual. Activities of dailyat the end of 2011, even if the child was not your to figure the deduction. If you previously filed living are eating, toileting, transferringdependent. A child includes your son, daughter, returns without using Medicare premiums to fig- (general mobility), bathing, dressing, andstepchild, adopted child, or foster child. A foster ure the deduction, you can file timely amended continence.child is any child placed with you by an author- returns to refigure the deduction. For more infor-
• An individual who requires substantial su-ized placement agency or by judgment, decree, mation, see Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
pervision to be protected from threats toor other order of any court of competent jurisdic- vidual Income Tax Return.
health and safety due to severe cognitivetion. Amounts paid for health insurance coverage
impairment.from retirement plan distributions that were non-One of the following statements must be
taxable because you are a retired public safetytrue. The certification must have been made by aofficer cannot be used to figure the deduction. licensed health care practitioner within the previ-• You were self-employed and had a net Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29. ous 12 months.profit for the year reported on Schedule C
(Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- Qualified long-term care insurance. You Benefits received. For information on ex-ness; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net can include premiums paid on a qualified cluding benefits you receive from a long-termProfit From Business; or Schedule F long-term care insurance contract when figuring care contract from gross income, see Publica-(Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming. your deduction. But, for each person covered, tion 525.
you can include only the smaller of the following• You were a partner with net earnings from Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-amounts.self-employment for the year reported on tion for any month you were eligible to partici-Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's 1. The amount paid for that person. pate in any employer (including your spouse's)Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, subsidized health plan at any time during that2. The amount shown below. Use the per-etc., box 14, code A. month, even if you did not actually participate. Inson's age at the end of the tax year. addition, if you were eligible for any month or• You used one of the optional methods to
part of a month to participate in any subsidizedfigure your net earnings from a. Age 40 or younger±$340
health plan maintained by the employer of eitherself-employment on Schedule SE. b. Age 41 to 50±$640 your dependent or your child who was under age• You received wages in 2011 from an S 27 at the end of 2011, do not use amounts paidc. Age 51 to 60±$1,270corporation in which you were a for coverage for that month to figure the deduc-more-than-2% shareholder. Health insur- d. Age 61 to 70±$3,390 tion. These rules are applied separately to plansance premiums paid or reimbursed by the that provide long-term care insurance and planse. Age 71 or older±$4,240S corporation are shown as wages on that do not provide long-term care insurance.Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. However, any medical insurance payments notQualified long-term care insurance con- deductible on Form 1040, line 29, can be in-The insurance plan must be established, or tract. A qualified long-term care insurance cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Aconsidered to be established as discussed in the contract is an insurance contract that only pro- (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, if you item-following bullets, under your business. vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv- ize deductions.ices. The contract must meet all the following• For self-employed individuals filing a Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract therequirements.Schedule C, C-EZ, or F, a policy can be health insurance deduction from your medicaleither in the name of the business or in the • It must be guaranteed renewable. insurance when figuring medical expenses onname of the individual. Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-• It must provide that refunds, other than
tions.• For partners, a policy can be either in the refunds on the death of the insured or
name of the partnership or in the name of complete surrender or cancellation of the Effect on self-employment tax. For tax yearsthe partner. You can either pay the premi- contract, and dividends under the contract beginning before or after 2010, you cannot sub-ums yourself or your partnership can pay may be used only to reduce future premi- tract the self-employed health insurance deduc-them and report the premium amounts on ums or increase future benefits. tion when figuring net earnings for yourSchedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed self-employment tax from the business under• It must not provide for a cash surrenderpayments to be included in your gross in- which the insurance plan is established, or con-value or other money that can be paid,come. However, if the policy is in your sidered to be established as discussed earlier.assigned, pledged, or borrowed.name and you pay the premiums yourself, For more information, see Schedule SE (Formthe partnership must reimburse you and • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex- 1040).report the premium amounts on Schedule penses incurred for services or items that
K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed payments would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex- How to figure the deduction. Generally, you
to be included in your gross income. Oth- cept where Medicare is a secondary payer can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
erwise, the insurance plan will not be con- or the contract makes per diem or other tions to figure your deduction. However, if any of
sidered to be established under your periodic payments without regard to ex- the following apply, you must use Worksheet
business. penses. 6-A in this chapter.
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Note. Use a separate worksheet for each trade or business under which an insurance plan is established.
1. Enter the total amount paid in 2011 for health insurance coverage established under your business for
2011 for you, your spouse, and your dependents. Your insurance can also cover your child who was
under age 27 at the end of 2011, even if the child was not your dependent. But do not include the
following.
• Amounts for any month you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your
spouse's employer or the employer of either your dependent or your child who was under the age
of 27 at the end of 2011.
• Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that were nontaxable because you are a
retired public safety officer.
• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4.
• Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.º
• Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H.
• Any payments for qualified long-term care insurance (see line 2) ...................... . 1.
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, enter for each person covered the
smaller of the following amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of the tax year.
 $340Ðif that person is age 40 or younger
$640Ðif age 41 to 50
$1,270Ðif age 51 to 60
$3,390Ðif age 61 to 70
$4,240Ðif age 71 or older
Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to participate in a long-term care
insurance plan subsidized by your or your spouse's employer or the employer of either your
dependent or your child who was under the age of 27 at the end of 2011. If more than one
person is covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter the total of
those amounts ........................................................ . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .......................................................... . 3.
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or business under which the
insurance plan is established. Do not include Conservation Reserve Program payments exempt from
self-employment tax. If the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 .................... . 4.
5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040), line 31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
line 3; Schedule F (Form 1040), line 34; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus any other
income allocable to the profitable businesses. Do not include Conservation Reserve Program
payments exempt from self-employment tax. See the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do
not  include any net losses shown on these schedules. ................................ . 5.
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 ....................................................... . 6.
7. Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 6 ............................... . 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 .................................................... . 8.
9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to the same trade or business in which
the insurance plan is established ............................................... . 9.
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .................................................... . 10.
11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an S corporation in which you are a
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is established .................. . 11.
12. Enter any amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount entered on line 4 or 11 above,
or any amount from Form 2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above ... . 12.
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ................................. . 13.
14. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 13 here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do not include this amount
when figuring any medical expense deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040). .................. . 14.
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business, do not enter your net profit from the business.
Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040), Section B, line 4b.
* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you created. However, it does not include capital gain
income.
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You had more than one source of income on a life insurance policy covering you, However, these rules do not apply to the follow-
subject to self-employment tax. ing property.an employee, or any person with a fi-
nancial interest in your business if you• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In- 1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifare directly or indirectly a beneficiary ofcome, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned your average annual gross receipts arethe policy. You are included amongIncome Exclusion. $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
• You are using amounts paid for qualified 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofpolicy owner is obligated to repay a
long-term care insurance to figure the de- the following conditions.loan from you using the proceeds of the
duction. policy. A person has a financial interest a. Your indirect costs of producing thein your business if the person is anIf you are claiming the health coverage tax property are $200,000 or less.owner or part owner of the business orcredit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverage
has lent money to the business. b. You use the cash method of accountingTax Credit, before you figure this deduction.
and do not account for inventories.b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,Health coverage tax credit. You may be
able to take this credit only if you were an eligible you generally cannot deduct the premi-
trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al- ums on any life insurance policy, en-
More information. For more information onternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment dowment contract, or annuity contract if these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules intrade adjustment assistance (RTAA) recipient, you are directly or indirectly a benefi- Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation ciary. The disallowance applies without nal Revenue Code section 263A.(PBGC) pension recipient. Use Form 8885 to regard to whom the policy covers.
figure the amount, if any, of this credit.
c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1 ship, you take out an insurance policy
of Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following. on your own life and name your part- When To Deduct
ners as beneficiaries to induce them to• Any amounts you included on Form 8885,
retain their investments in the partner- Premiumsline 4.
ship, you are considered a beneficiary.• Any qualified health insurance premiums You cannot deduct the insurance premi- You can usually deduct insurance premiums inyou paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.º the tax year to which they apply.ums.
• Any health coverage tax credit advance
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take outpayments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Cash method. If you use the cash method of
a policy on your life or on the life of an-Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad- accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-
vance Payments. other person with a financial interest in miums in the tax year you actually paid them,
your business to get or protect a business even if you incurred them in an earlier year.
More than one health plan and business. loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as However, see Prepayment, later.
If you have more than one health plan during the a business expense. Nor can you deduct
year and each plan is established under a differ- the premiums as interest on business Accrual method. If you use an accrualent business, you must use separate work- loans or as an expense of financing loans. method of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-sheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan's net In the event of death, the proceeds of the ance premiums before the tax year in which youearnings limit. Include the premium you paid policy are generally not taxed as income incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannotunder each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa- even if they are used to liquidate the debt. deduct insurance premiums before the tax yearrate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a ception for recurring items applies). For moreplan that provides long-term care insurance, the information about the accrual method of ac-total of the amounts entered for each person on counting, see chapter 1. For information aboutline 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the Capitalized Premiums the exception for recurring items, see Publica-appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. tion 538.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses incosts for certain production or resale activities. advance, even if you pay them in advance. ThisInclude these costs in the basis of property youNondeductible rule applies to any expense paid far enough inproduce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- advance to, in effect, create an asset with a
ing them as a current deduction. You recover thePremiums useful life extending substantially beyond the
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost end of the current tax year.
of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseYou cannot deduct premiums on the following Expenses such as insurance are generally
kinds of insurance. dispose of the property. allocable to a period of time. You can deduct
insurance expenses for the year to which theyIndirect costs include premiums for insur-1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot are allocable.ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-deduct amounts credited to a reserve set ment, materials, property produced, or propertyup for self-insurance. This applies even if Example. In 2011, you signed a 3-year in-acquired for resale.you cannot get business insurance cover- surance contract. Even though you paid the pre-age for certain business risks. However, miums for 2011, 2012, and 2013 when youyour actual losses may be deductible. See Uniform capitalization rules. You may be signed the contract, you can only deduct thePublication 547. subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you premium for 2011 on your 2011 tax return. You
do any of the following, unless the property is can deduct in 2012 and 2013 the premium allo-2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-
produced for your use other than in a business cable to those years.miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-
or an activity carried on for profit.ings due to sickness or disability. However,
see the discussion on overhead insurance, Dividends received. If you receive dividends1. Produce real property or tangible personalitem (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear- from business insurance and you deducted theproperty. For this purpose, tangible per-lier. premiums in prior years, at least part of thesonal property includes a film, sound re- dividends generally are income. For more infor-3. Certain life insurance and annuities. cording, video tape, book, or similar mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (taxproperty.a. For contracts issued before June 9, benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I
2. Acquire property for resale.1997, you cannot deduct the premiums Deduct?
Page 20 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 21 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deducting or Amortizing Research and Experimentation Costs
IF you . . . THEN . . .7.
Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in the
experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all later
business expense years.
Costs You Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. SeeCan Deduct Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
or Capitalize
Useful Items
You may want to see: Research and
Introduction Experimental CostsPublication
This chapter discusses costs you can elect to
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of The costs of research and experimentation arededuct or capitalize.
Assets generally capital expenses. However, you canYou generally deduct a cost as a current elect to deduct these costs as a current businessbusiness expense by subtracting it from your Form (and Instructions) expense. Your election to deduct these costs isincome in either the year you incur it or the year binding for the year it is made and for all lateryou pay it. ❏ 3468 Investment Credit years unless you get IRS approval to make a
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to change.❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credit
recover it over a period of years through periodic If you meet certain requirements, you may
deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre- See chapter 12 for information about getting elect to defer and amortize research and experi-
ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to mental costs. For information on electing to de-publications and forms.
the basis of property to which it relates. fer and amortize these costs, see Research and
Experimental Costs  in chapter 8.A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust
makes the election to deduct or capitalize the Research and experimental costs defined.costs discussed in this chapter except for explo- Carrying Charges Research and experimental costs are reasona-ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individual ble costs you incur in your trade or business forpartner, shareholder, or beneficiary elects Carrying charges include the taxes and interest activities intended to provide information thatwhether to deduct or capitalize exploration you pay to carry or develop real property or to would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-costs. carry, transport, or install personal property. ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty
Certain carrying charges must be capitalizedYou may be subject to the alternative exists if the information available to you does not
under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re- establish how to develop or improve a product or
search and experimental, intangible the appropriate design of a product. Whethermation on capitalization of interest, see chapter
CAUTION
!
drilling, exploration, development, circulation, or costs qualify as research and experimental4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying charges
costs depends on the nature of the activity tobusiness organizational costs. not subject to the uniform capitalization rules,
which the costs relate rather than on the naturebut only if they are otherwise deductible.For more information on the alternative mini- of the product or improvement being developedmum tax, see the instructions for one of the You can elect to capitalize carrying charges or the level of technological advancement.following forms. separately for each project you have and for The costs of obtaining a patent, includingeach type of carrying charge. For unimproved• Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ attorneys' fees paid or incurred in making andand unproductive real property, your election isIndividuals. perfecting a patent application, are research and
good for only 1 year. You must decide whether experimental costs. However, costs paid or in-• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ to capitalize carrying charges each year the curred to obtain another's patent are not re-Corporations. property remains unimproved and unproductive. search and experimental costs.
For other real property, your election to capital- Product. The term ªproductº includes any ofTopics ize carrying charges remains in effect until con- the following items.This chapter discusses: struction or development is completed. For
• Formula.personal property, your election is effective until
• Carrying charges the date you install or first use it, whichever is • Invention.
later.• Research and experimental costs • Patent.
• Intangible drilling costs • Pilot model.How to make the election. To make the elec-• Exploration costs • Process.tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state-
• Development costs ment saying which charges you elect to • Technique.
capitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for• Circulation costs • Property similar to the items listed above.the year the election is to be effective. However,
• Environmental cleanup costs if you timely filed your return for the year without It also includes products used by you in your
making the election, you can still make the elec-• Qualified disaster expenses trade or business or held for sale, lease, or
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months license.• Business start-up and organizational costs of the due date of the return (excluding exten- Costs not included. Research and experi-• Reforestation costs sions). Attach the statement to the amended mental costs do not include expenses for any of
return and write ªFiled pursuant to section• Retired asset removal costs the following activities.
301.9100-2º on the statement. File the amended• Barrier removal costs • Advertising or promotions.return at the same address you filed the original
• Film and television production costs return. • Consumer surveys.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Efficiency surveys. How to make the election. You elect to de- exploration costs. Each shareholder, not the S
duct IDCs as a current business expense by corporation, elects whether to capitalize or to• Management studies. taking the deduction on your income tax return deduct that shareholder's share of exploration
• Quality control testing. for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No costs.
formal statement is required. If you file Schedule• Research in connection with literary, his- Reduced corporate deductions for explora-C (Form 1040), enter these costs under ªOthertorical, or similar projects. tion costs. A corporation (other than an Sexpenses.º
corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes-• The acquisition of another's patent, model, For oil and gas wells, your election is binding
tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re-production, or process. for the year it is made and for all later years. For
maining 30% of costs and amortize them overgeothermal wells, your election can be revoked
the 60-month period starting with the month theby the filing of an amended return on which youWhen and how to elect. You make the elec- exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo-do not take the deduction. You can file thetion to deduct research and experimental costs ration may also elect to capitalize and amortizeamended return for the year up to the normalby deducting them on your tax return for the year mining exploration costs over a 10-year period.time of expiration for filing a claim for credit orin which you first pay or incur research and For more information on this method of amorti-refund, generally, within 3 years after the dateexperimental costs. If you do not make the elec- zation, see Internal Revenue Code sectionyou filed the original return or within 2 years aftertion to deduct research and experimental costs 59(e).the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.in the first year in which you pay or incur the The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannotcosts, you can deduct the costs in a later year Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells. be added to its basis in the property to figureonly with approval from the IRS. If you capitalize the drilling and development cost depletion. However, the amount amortized
costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv- is treated as additional depreciation and is sub-Research credit. If you pay or incur qualified ice during the tax year, you may be able to claim ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-research expenses, you may be able to take the a business energy credit. See the instructions sition of the property. See Section 1250research credit. For more information about the for Form 3468 for more information. Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap-research credit, see the instructions for Form ter 3 of Publication 544.Nonproductive well. If you capitalize your6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities. These rules also apply to the deduction ofIDCs, you have another option if the well is development costs by corporations. See Devel-nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the opment Costs, later.nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You
must indicate and clearly state your election on Recapture of exploration expenses. WhenIntangible your tax return for the year the well is completed. your mine reaches the producing stage, youOnce made, the election for oil and gas wells isDrilling Costs must recapture any exploration costs youbinding for all later years. You can revoke your elected to deduct. Use either of the followingelection for a geothermal well by filing anThe costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal methods.amended return that does not claim the loss.wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You
Method 1ÐInclude the deducted costs incan usually recover them through depreciation Costs incurred outside the United States.
gross income for the tax year the mineor depletion. However, you can elect to deduct You cannot deduct as a current business ex-
reaches the producing stage. Your electionintangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi- pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,
must be clearly indicated on the return. In-ness expense. These are certain drilling and gas, or geothermal well located outside the
crease your adjusted basis in the mine bydevelopment costs for wells in the United States United States. However, you can elect to include
the amount included in income. Generally,in which you hold an operating or working inter- the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to
you must elect this recapture method by theest. You can deduct only costs for drilling or figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not
due date (including extensions) of your re-preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, or make this election, you can deduct the costs
turn. However, if you timely filed your returngeothermal steam or hot water. over the 10-year period beginning with the tax
for the year without making the election,year in which you paid or incurred them. TheseYou can elect to deduct only the costs of you can still make the election by filing anrules do not apply to a nonproductive well.items with no salvage value. These include amended return within 6 months of the duewages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re- date of the return (excluding extensions).lated to drilling wells and preparing them for Make the election on your amended returnproduction. Your cost for any drilling or develop- and write ªFiled pursuant to sectionment work done by contractors under any form Exploration Costs 301.9100-2º on the form where you are in-of contract is also an IDC. However, see cluding the income. File the amended re-Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital- The costs of determining the existence, location, turn at the same address you filed theized, later. extent, or quality of any mineral deposit are original return.ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs leadYou can also elect to deduct the cost of
to the development of a mine. You recover thesedrilling exploratory bore holes to determine the Method 2ÐDo not claim any depletion de-
costs through depletion as the mineral is re-location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon duction for the tax year the mine reaches
moved from the ground. However, you can electdeposits if the shaft is capable of conducting the producing stage and any later tax years
to deduct domestic exploration costs paid orhydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It until the depletion you would have deducted
incurred before the beginning of the develop-does not matter whether there is any intent to equals the exploration costs you deducted.
ment stage of the mine (except those for oil andproduce hydrocarbons.
gas wells). You also must recapture deducted explora-If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a
tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty fromcurrent business expense, you can elect to de- How to make the election. You elect to de- mine property before it reaches the producingduct them over the 60-month period beginning duct exploration costs by taking the deduction stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction forwith the month they were paid or incurred. on your income tax return, or on an amended the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty andincome tax return, for the first tax year for which any later tax years until the depletion you wouldAmounts paid to contractor that must be you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred have deducted equals the exploration costs youcapitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor during the tax year. Your return must adequately deducted.must be capitalized if they are either: describe and identify each property or mine, and Generally, if you dispose of the mine before• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of clearly state how much is being deducted for you have fully recaptured the exploration costsdepreciable property, or each one. The election applies to the tax year you deducted, recapture the balance by treatingyou make this election and all later tax years.• Amounts paid only out of production or all or part of your gain as ordinary income. Under
proceeds from production if these Partnerships and S corporations. Each these circumstances, you generally treat as or-
amounts are depletable income to the re- partner, not the partnership, elects whether to dinary income all of your gain if it is less than
cipient. capitalize or to deduct that partner's share of your adjusted exploration costs with respect to
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the mine. If your gain is more than your adjusted Qualified contaminated site. A qualified
contaminated site is any area that meets both ofexploration costs, treat as ordinary income only Circulation Costs the following requirements.a part of your gain, up to the amount of your
adjusted exploration costs. A publisher can deduct as a current business 1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,
expense the costs of establishing, maintaining, for the production of income, or as inven-
or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incur tory.
magazine, or other periodical. For example, aexploration costs for a mine or other natural 2. There has been a release, threat of re-publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extradeposit located outside the United States, you lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-employees for a limited time to get new sub-cannot deduct all the costs in the current year. stance at or on the site.scriptions through telephone calls. CirculationYou can elect to include the costs (other than for
costs are deductible even if they normally wouldan oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjusted You must get a statement from the designated
be capitalized. state environmental agency that the site meetsbasis of the mineral property to figure cost de-
requirement (2).pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chapter This rule does not apply to the following
A site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,9.) If you do not make this election, you must costs that must be capitalized.
the national priorities list under sectiondeduct the costs over the 10-year period begin- • The purchase of land or depreciable prop- 105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur erty. mental Response, Compensation, and Liabilitythem. These rules also apply to foreign develop-
Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the nationalment costs. • The acquisition of circulation through the
priorities list, contact the U.S. Environmentalpurchase of any part of the business of
Protection Agency.another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
zine, or other periodical, including the Expenditures for depreciable property.
purchase of another publisher's list of sub- You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-Development Costs
scribers. ciable property used in connection with the
abatement or control of hazardous substancesYou can deduct costs paid or incurred during the
at a qualified contaminated site. However, thetax year for developing a mine or any other Other treatment of circulation costs. If you part of the depreciation for such property that isnatural deposit (other than an oil or gas well) do not want to deduct circulation costs as a otherwise allocated to the qualified contami-located in the United States. These costs must current business expense, you can elect one of nated site shall be treated as an environmentalbe paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or the following ways to recover these costs. cleanup cost.minerals in commercially marketable quantities.
• Capitalize all circulation costs that areDevelopment costs also include depreciation on When and how to elect. You elect to deductproperly chargeable to a capital accountimprovements used in the development of ores environmental cleanup costs by taking the de-(see chapter 1).or minerals and costs incurred for you by a duction on the income tax return (filed by the duecontractor. Development costs do not include • Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year date including extensions) for the tax year inthe costs for the acquisition or improvement of period beginning with the tax year they which the costs are paid or incurred. The costsdepreciable property. were paid or incurred. are deducted differently depending on the type
Instead of deducting development costs in of business entity involved.
the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treat How to make the election. You elect to capi- Individuals. Deduct the environmentalthe cost as deferred expenses and deduct them talize circulation costs by attaching a statement cleanup costs on the ªOther Expensesº line ofratably as the units of produced ores or minerals Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the scheduleto your return for the first tax year the electionbenefited by the expenses are sold. This elec- requires you to separately identify each expenseapplies. Your election is binding for the year it istion applies each tax year to expenses paid or included in ªOther Expensesº write ªSection 198made and for all later years, unless you get IRSincurred in that year. Once made, the election is Electionº on the line next to the environmentalapproval to revoke it.binding for the year and cannot be revoked for cleanup costs.any reason.
All other entities. All other taxpayers (in-
cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)
How to make the election. The election to Environmental Cleanup deduct the environmental cleanup costs on the
deduct development costs ratably as the ores or ªOther Deductionsº line of the appropriate fed-
minerals are sold must be made for each mine Costs eral income tax return. On a statement attached
or other natural deposit by a clear indication on to the return that separately identifies each ex-
your return or by a statement filed with the IRS Environmental cleanup costs are generally capi- pense included in ªOther Deductionsº write
office where you file your return. Generally, you tal expenditures. However, you can elect to de- ªSection 198 Electionº on the line next to the
must make the election by the due date of the duct these costs as a current business expense amount for environmental cleanup costs.
return (including extensions). However, if you if certain requirements (discussed later) are met. More than one environmental cleanuptimely filed your return for the year without mak- This special tax treatment is generally available cost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur moreing the election, you can still make the election for environmental cleanup costs you pay or incur than one environmental cleanup cost, you canby filing an amended return within 6 months of before January 1, 2012. elect to deduct one or more of such expendi-the due date of the return (excluding exten- tures for that year. You can elect to deduct onesions). Clearly indicate the election on your Environmental cleanup costs. Environmen- expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex-amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to tal cleanup costs are generally costs you pay or penditure (whether or not they are of the samesection 301.9100-2.º File the amended return at incur to abate or control hazardous substances type or paid or incurred with respect to the samethe same address you filed the original return. at a qualified contaminated site. qualified contaminated site). An election to de-
duct an expenditure for one year has no effectHazardous substance. Hazardous sub- on other years. You must make a separate elec-Foreign development costs. The rules dis- stances are defined in section 101(14) of the tion for each year in which you intend to deductcussed earlier for foreign exploration costs apply Comprehensive Environmental Response, environmental cleanup costs.to foreign development costs. Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and
certain substances are designated as hazard- Recapture. This deduction may have to be
ous in section 102 of the Act. Also, petroleumReduced corporate deductions for develop- recaptured as ordinary income under section
products are treated as hazardous substances.ment costs. The rules discussed earlier for 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the
However, substances are not hazardous if areduced corporate deductions for exploration property that would have received an addition to
removal or remedial action is prohibited undercosts also apply to corporate deductions for de- basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-
velopment costs. sections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act. diture. For more information on recapturing the
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi- required, attach a statement containing the fol-
lowing information for each qualified timbercation 544. Business Start-Up and
property for which an election is being made.
Organizational Costs • The unique stand identification numbers.More information. For more information
about the environmental cleanup cost deduc- • The total number of acres reforested dur-Business start-up and organizational costs aretion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198. ing the tax year.generally capital expenditures. However, you
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business • The nature of the reforestation treatments.start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid
• The total amounts of qualified reforesta-or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000
tion expenditures eligible to be amortizedQualified Disaster deduction is reduced by the amount your total
or deducted.start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000.
Expenses Any remaining costs must be amortized. For
However, if you timely filed your return for theinformation about amortizing start-up and orga-
You can elect to deduct rather than capitalize year without making the election, you can stillnizational costs, see chapter 8.
any qualified disaster expenses that you paid or make the election by filing an amended returnStart-up costs include any amounts paid or
incurred after 2007. within 6 months of the due date of the returnincurred in connection with creating an active
(excluding extensions). Clearly indicate thetrade or business or investigating the creation or
election on your amended return and write ªFiledacquisition of an active trade or business. Orga-Qualified disaster expense. A qualified dis- pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File thenizational costs include the costs of creating aaster expense is an expenditure that: amended return at the same address you filedcorporation. For more information on start-up
the original return. The election applies whenand organizational costs, see chapter 8.1. Is paid or incurred in connection with a
computing taxable income for the current taxtrade or business or with business-related How to make the election. You elect to de- year and all subsequent years.property, duct the start-up or organizational costs by If you elected to deduct qualified timber costs2. Is otherwise capitalized, and claiming the deduction on the income tax return on a federal income tax return filed before June
(filed by the due date including extensions) for 15, 2006, but did not include the above informa-3. Is for one of the following purposes. the tax year in which the active trade or business tion, complete Part IV of Form T (Timber) or the
begins. However, if you timely filed your returna. The abatement or control of hazardous required statement and attach it to the first fed-
for the year without making the election, you cansubstances that were released because eral income tax return you file after June 14,
still make the election by filing an amendedof a federally declared disaster occur- 2006. If you have not elected to deduct qualified
return within 6 months of the due date of thering before January 1, 2010, timber costs in a prior year you may be able to
return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate do so by filing Form 3115, Application forb. The removal of debris from, or the dem- the election on your amended return and write Change in Accounting Method. For more infor-olition of structures on, real property ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File the mation, see Notice 2006-47 on page 892 ofthat is business-related property dam- amended return at the same address you filed Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20. Internalaged or destroyed as a result of a fed- the original return. The election applies when Revenue Bulletin 2006-20 is available at www.erally declared disaster occurring computing taxable income for the current tax irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20.pdf.before such date, or year and all subsequent years. For additional information on reforestation
c. The repair of business-related property costs, see chapter 8.
damaged as a result of a federally de-
clared disaster occurring before such Recapture. This deduction may have to beReforestation Costsdate. recaptured as ordinary income under section
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of theReforestation costs are generally capital expen- property that would have received an addition toditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-Federally declared disaster. A federally de- $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0 diture. For more information on recapturing theclared disaster is a disaster that occurred in an for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paid deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi-area declared by the President to be eligible for or incurred after October 22, 2004, for each cation 544.federal assistance under the Robert T. Stafford qualified timber property. The remaining costs
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. can be amortized over an 84-month period. For
information about amortizing reforestation
costs, see chapter 8.Business-related property. Busi- Retired Asset RemovalQualifying reforestation costs are the directness-related property is property you held (a) for costs of planting or seeding for forestation oruse in a trade or business or for the production Costsreforestation. Qualified timber property is prop-of income or (b) that is stock in trade or other erty that contains trees in significant commercialproperty included in inventory or held mainly for If you retire and remove a depreciable asset inquantities. See chapter 8 for more informationsale to customers. connection with the installation or production ofon qualifying reforestation costs and qualified a replacement asset, you can deduct the coststimber property. of removing the retired asset. However, if youIf you elect to deduct qualified reforestationRecapture. If you made the election to deduct replace a component (part) of a depreciablecosts, create and maintain separate timber ac-qualified disaster expenses, the deduction may asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-counts for each qualified timber property andhave to be recaptured as ordinary income under placement is an improvement and deduct theinclude all reforestation costs and the datessection 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose costs if the replacement is a repair.each was applied. Do not include this qualifiedof the property that would have received an
timber property in any account (for example,addition to basis had you not made the election.
depletion block) for which depletion is allowed.For more information on recapturing the deduc-
tion, see  Depreciation and amortization  under
How to make the election. You elect to de- Barrier Removal CostsGain Treated as Ordinary Income in Publication duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming544. The cost of an improvement to a business assetthe deduction on your timely filed income tax
is normally a capital expense. However, you canreturn (including extensions) for the tax year the
More information. For more information elect to deduct the costs of making a facility orexpenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim-
about expensing of qualified disaster expenses, public transportation vehicle more accessible tober), Forest Activities Schedule, is required,
see Internal Revenue Code section 198A. and usable by those who are disabled or elderly.complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is not
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must own or lease the facility or vehicle for • Floors. you may be able to claim the disabled access
use in connection with your trade or business. credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must• Toilet rooms.A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc- reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by
• Water fountains.tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or the amount of the credit.
similar real or personal property. A public trans- For more information about the disabled ac-• Public telephones.portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or cess credit, see Form 8826.
• Elevators.railroad car, that provides transportation service
to the public (including service for your custom- • Controls.ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-
• Signage.ing transportation services). Film and TelevisionYou cannot deduct any costs that you paid or • Alarms.incurred to completely renovate or build a facility Production Costs• Protruding objects.or public transportation vehicle or to replace
depreciable property in the normal course of Film and television production costs are gener-• Symbols of accessibility.business. ally capital expenses. However, you can elect to
You can find the ADA guidelines and require- deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc-Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as ments for architectural barrier removal at www. tions that begin after October 22, 2004, anda cost of removing barriers to the disabled and usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html. before January 1, 2012. For more information,the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However, see section 181 of the Internal Revenue CodeThe costs for removal of transportation barri-you can add any costs over this limit to the basis and Temporary Regulations sections 1.181-1Ters from rail facilities, buses, and rapid and lightof the property and depreciate these excess through 1.181-6T.rail vehicles are deductible. You can find thecosts.
guidelines and requirements for transportationPartners and partnerships. The $15,000 barrier removal at www.fta.dot.gov.limit applies to a partnership and also to each Also, you can access the ADA website atpartner in the partnership. A partner can allocate www.ada.gov for additional information.the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part-
Other barrier removals. To be deductible,ner's individually incurred costs and the part-
expenses of removing any barrier not coveredner's distributive share of partnership costs. If 8.by the above standards must meet all three ofthe partner cannot deduct the entire share of
the following tests. partnership costs, the partnership can add any
costs not deducted to the basis of the improved 1. The removed barrier must be a substantialproperty. Amortizationbarrier to access or use of a facility orA partnership must be able to show that any public transportation vehicle by personsamount added to basis was not deducted by the who have a disability or are elderly.partner and that it was over a partner's $15,000
Introductionlimit (as determined by the partner). If the part- 2. The removed barrier must have been a
nership cannot show this, it is presumed that the barrier for at least one major group of per- Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
partner was able to deduct the distributive share sons who have a disability or are elderly ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of
of the partnership's costs in full. (such as people who are blind, deaf, or time. It is similar to the straight line method of
wheelchair users). depreciation.Example. John Duke's distributive share of The various amortizable costs covered in3. The barrier must be removed without cre-ABC partnership's deductible expenses for the this chapter are included in the list below. How-ating any new barrier that significantly im-removal of architectural barriers was $14,000. ever, this chapter does not discuss amortizationpairs access to or use of the facility orJohn had $12,000 of similar expenses in his sole of bond premium. For information on that topic,vehicle by a major group of persons whoproprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 of see chapter 3 of Publication 550, Investmenthave a disability or are elderly.them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of Income and Expenses.the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC's ex-
penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his How to make the election. If you elect to Topicsown expenses to the basis of the property used deduct your costs for removing barriers to the This chapter discusses:in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction on
could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 ± $8,000) of your income tax return (partnership return for • Deducting amortizationhis share of the partnership's expenses because partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were
of how John applied the limit, ABC can add paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a • Amortizing costs of starting a business
$6,000 to the basis of its property. separate item. The election applies to all the • Amortizing costs of getting a leasequalifying costs you have during the year, up toQualification standards. You can deduct the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you • Amortizing costs of section 197 intangiblesyour costs as a current expense only if the bar- must maintain adequate records to support yourrier removal meets the guidelines and require- • Amortizing reforestation costsdeduction.ments issued by the Architectural and • Amortizing costs of geological and geo-For your election to be valid, you generallyTransportation Barriers Compliance Board physical costsmust file your return by its due date, includingunder the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) extensions. However, if you timely filed yourof 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa- • Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-return for the year without making the election,bilities Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm. tiesyou can still make the election by filing anThe following is a list of some architectural • Amortizing costs of research and experi-amended return within 6 months of the due datebarrier removal costs that can be deducted. mentationof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-
• Ground and floor surfaces. cate the election on your amended return and • Amortizing costs of certain tax preferenceswrite ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File• Walks. the amended return at the same address you
• Parking lots. filed the original return. Your election is irrevoca- Useful Items
ble after the due date, including extensions, of You may want to see:• Ramps. your return.
• Entrances. Publication
Disabled access credit. If you make your• Doors and doorways. business accessible to persons with disabilities ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
• Stairs. and your business is an eligible small business, Assets
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 25

Page 26 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses For costs paid or incurred after October 22, and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-
2004, and before September 9, 2008, you can perimental Costs, later.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property elect to deduct a limited amount of business
Purchasing an active trade or business.start-up and organizational costs in the yearForm (and Instructions) Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-your active trade or business begins. Any costs
tive trade or business include only investigativenot deducted can be amortized ratably over a❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization costs incurred in the course of a general search180-month period, beginning with the month you
❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ for or preliminary investigation of the business.begin business. If the election is made, you must
Corporations These are costs that help you decide whether toattach any statement required by Regulations
purchase a business. Costs you incur in ansections 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and 1.709-1(c),❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ attempt to purchase a specific business are cap-as in effect before September 9, 2008.Individuals ital expenses that you cannot amortize.
Note. You can apply the provisions of Regu-See chapter 12 for information about getting Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac-lations sections 1.195-1, 1.248-1, and 1.709-1 topublications and forms. counting firm and a law firm to assist you in theall business start-up and organizational costs
potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researchedpaid or incurred after October 22, 2004, pro-
XYZ's industry and analyzed the financial pro-vided the period of limitations on assessment
jections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firmhas not expired for the year of the election.How To Deduct prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ,Otherwise, the provisions under Regulations
Inc. The letter stated that a binding commitmentsections 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and 1.709-1(c),Amortization would result only after a purchase agreementas in effect before September 9, 2008, will apply.
was signed. The law firm and accounting firmFor costs paid or incurred before October 23,To deduct amortization that begins during the continued to provide services including a review2004, you can elect to amortize businesscurrent tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562 of XYZ's books and records and the preparationstart-up and organization costs over an amorti-and attach it to your income tax return. of a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, youzation period of 60 months or more. See How ToTo report amortization from previous years, signed a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.Make the Election, later.in addition to amortization that begins in the All amounts paid or incurred to investigateThe cost must qualify as one of the following.current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa- the business before October 22nd are amortiz-rately. For example, in 2010, you began to amor- • A business start-up cost. able investigative costs. Amounts paid on ortize a lease. In 2011, you began to amortize a after that date relate to the attempt to purchase• An organizational cost for a corporation.second lease. Report amortization from the new the business and therefore must be capitalized.lease on line 42 of your 2011 Form 4562. Report • An organizational cost for a partnership.
amortization from the 2010 lease on line 43 of Disposition of business. If you completely
your 2011 Form 4562. dispose of your business before the end of theBusiness Start-Up CostsIf you do not have any new amortizable ex- amortization period, you can deduct any remain-
penses for the current year, you are not required ing deferred start-up costs. However, you canStart-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for:to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claiming deduct these deferred start-up costs only to the(a) creating an active trade or business; or (b)depreciation). Report the current year's deduc- extent they qualify as a loss from a business.investigating the creation or acquisition of antion for amortization that began in a prior year active trade or business. Start-up costs includedirectly on the ªOther deductionº or ªOther ex- Costs of Organizingamounts paid or incurred in connection with anpense lineº of your return. existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the a Corporation
production of income in anticipation of the activ-
Amounts paid to organize a corporation are theity becoming an active trade or business.
direct costs of creating the corporation.
Starting a Business Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz-
Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza-able if it meets both of the following tests.
When you start a business, treat all eligible costs tional cost, it must be:• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid oryou incur before you begin operating the busi- • For the creation of the corporation,incurred it to operate an existing activeness as capital expenditures which are part of
trade or business (in the same field as theyour basis in the business. Generally, you re- • Chargeable to a capital account (seeone you entered into).cover costs for particular assets through depre- chapter 1),
ciation deductions. However, you generally • It is a cost you pay or incur before the day • Amortized over the life of the corporation ifcannot recover other costs until you sell the your active trade or business begins. the corporation had a fixed life, andbusiness or otherwise go out of business. For a
discussion on how to treat these costs, see If • Incurred before the end of the first tax yearStart-up costs include amounts paid for the
your attempt to go into business is unsuccessful in which the corporation is in business.following:
under Capital Expenses in chapter 1.
• An analysis or survey of potential markets, A corporation using the cash method of ac-For costs paid or incurred after September 8, products, labor supply, transportation facil- counting can amortize organizational costs in-2008, you can deduct a limited amount of ities, etc. curred within the first tax year, even if it does notstart-up and organizational costs. The costs that
pay them in that year.are not deducted currently can be amortized • Advertisements for the opening of the
ratably over a 180-month period. The amortiza- business. Examples of organizational costs include:
tion period starts with the month you begin oper- • Salaries and wages for employees who • The cost of temporary directors.ating your active trade or business. You are not are being trained and their instructors.required to attach a statement to make this elec- • The cost of organizational meetings.
tion. You can choose to forgo this election by • Travel and other necessary costs for se- • State incorporation fees.affirmatively electing to capitalize your start-up curing prospective distributors, suppliers,
costs on your income tax return filed by the due or customers. • The cost of legal services.
date (including extensions) for the tax year in • Salaries and fees for executives and con-which the active trade or business begins. Once Nonqualifying costs. The following items aresultants, or for similar professional serv-made, the election to either amortize or capital- capital expenses that cannot be amortized:ices.ize start-up costs is irrevocable and applies to all
start-up costs that are related to your trade or • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-
business. See Regulations sections 1.195-1, Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do not curities, such as commissions, profes-
1.248-1, and 1.709-1. include deductible interest, taxes, or research sional fees, and printing costs.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Costs associated with the transfer of as- costs can be deducted only to the extent they cannot make this election. You, as a share-
holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs youqualify as a loss from a business.sets to the corporation.
incur in setting up your corporation or partner-
ship. Only the corporation or partnership canHow To AmortizeCosts of Organizing amortize these costs.
However, you, as an individual, can elect toa Partnership Deduct start-up and organizational costs in
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-equal amounts over the applicable amortization
The costs to organize a partnership are the est in an existing partnership. These costs qual-period (discussed earlier). You can choose an
direct costs of creating the partnership. ify as business start-up costs if you acquire theamortization period for start-up costs that is dif-
partnership interest.ferent from the period you choose for organiza-
Qualifying costs. A partnership can amortize tional costs, as long as both are not less than the Start-up costs election statement. If youan organizational cost only if it meets all the applicable amortization period. Once you elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach afollowing tests. choose an amortization period, you cannot separate statement (if required) that containschange it. the following information.• It is for the creation of the partnership and
To figure your deduction, divide your totalnot for starting or operating the partner- • A description of the business to which thestart-up or organizational costs by the months inship trade or business. start-up costs relate.the amortization period. The result is the amount
• It is chargeable to a capital account (see you can deduct for each month. • A description of each start-up cost in-chapter 1). curred.
Cash method partnership. A partnership us-• It could be amortized over the life of the • The month your active business began (oring the cash method of accounting can deductpartnership if the partnership had a fixed was acquired).an organizational cost only if it has been paid bylife.
the end of the tax year. However, any cost the • The number of months in your amortiza-
• It is incurred by the due date of the part- partnership could have deducted as an organi- tion period (which is generally 180
nership return (excluding extensions) for zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been months).
the first tax year in which the partnership paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of
is in business. However, if the partnership payment. Filing the statement early. You can elect
uses the cash method of accounting and to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-
pays the cost after the end of its first tax ment with a return for any tax year before the
year, see Cash method partnership under How To Make the Election year your active business begins. If you file the
How To Amortize, later. statement early, the election becomes effective
To elect to amortize start-up or organizational in the month of the tax year your active business• It is for a type of item normally expected to costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562 begins.benefit the partnership throughout its en- to your return for the first tax year you are in
tire life. Revised statement. You can file a revisedbusiness. You may also be required to attach an
statement to include any start-up costs not in-accompanying statement (described later) to
Organizational costs include the following cluded in your original statement. However, youyour return.
cannot include on the revised statement anyfees. For start-up or organizational costs paid or cost you previously treated on your return as aincurred after September 8, 2008, an accompa-• Legal fees for services incident to the or- cost other than a start-up cost. You can file thenying statement is not required. Generally, forganization of the partnership, such as ne- revised statement with a return filed after thestart-up or organizational costs paid or incurredgotiation and preparation of the return on which you elected to amortize yourbefore September 9, 2008, and after Octoberpartnership agreement. start-up costs.22, 2004, unless you choose to apply Regula-
• Accounting fees for services incident to tions sections 1.195-1, 1.248-1, and 1.709-1, Organizational costs election statement. Ifthe organization of the partnership. you must also attach an accompanying state- you elect to amortize your corporation's or part-
ment to elect to amortize the costs. nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa-• Filing fees.
If you have both start-up and organizational rate statement (if required) that contains the
costs, attach a separate statement (if required) following information.Nonqualifying costs. The following costs to your return for each type of cost. See Starting • A description of each cost.cannot be amortized. a Business, earlier, for more information.
• The amount of each cost.• The cost of acquiring assets for the part- Generally, you must file the return by the due
nership or transferring assets to the part- date (including any extensions). However, if you • The date each cost was incurred.nership. timely filed your return for the year without mak-
• The month your corporation or partnershiping the election, you can still make the election• The cost of admitting or removing part- began active business (or acquired theby filing an amended return within 6 months ofners, other than at the time the partnership business).the due date of the return (excluding exten-is first organized. sions). For more information, see the instruc- • The number of months in your amortiza-• The cost of making a contract concerning tions for Part VI of Form 4562. tion period (which is generally 180
the operation of the partnership trade or You can choose to forgo the election to months).
business including a contract between a amortize by affirmatively electing to capitalize
partner and the partnership. your start-up or organizational costs on your Partnerships. The statement prepared for
income tax return filed by the due date (including a cash basis partnership must also indicate the• The costs for issuing and marketing inter- extensions) for the tax year in which the active amount paid before the end of the year for eachests in the partnership such as brokerage, trade or business begins. cost.registration, and legal fees and printing You do not need to separately list any part-costs. These ªsyndication feesº are capital Note. The election to either amortize or cap- nership organizational cost that is less than $10.expenses that cannot be depreciated or italize start-up or organizational costs is irrevo- Instead, you can list the total amount of theseamortized. cable and applies to all start-up and costs with the dates the first and last costs were
organizational costs that are related to the trade incurred.
or business.Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is After a partnership makes the election to
liquidated before the end of the amortization If your business is organized as a corpora- amortize organizational costs, it can later file an
period, the unamortized amount of qualifying tion or partnership, only the corporation or part- amended return to include additional organiza-
organizational costs can be deducted in the nership can elect to amortize its start-up or tional costs not included in the partnership's
organizational costs. A shareholder or partnerpartnership's final tax year. However, these original return and statement.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi- the terms and conditions of employment,
ble. For example, if the cost of computer whether contractual or otherwise, and any otherGetting a Lease software is not separately stated from the cost of value placed on employees or any of their attrib-
hardware or other tangible property and you utes.If you get a lease for business property, you
consistently treat it as part of the cost of the For example, you must amortize the part ofrecover the cost by amortizing it over the term of
hardware or other tangible property, these rules the purchase price of a business that is for thethe lease. The term of the lease for amortization
do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac- existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, youpurposes generally includes all renewal options
quiring real property held for the production of must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing(and any other period for which you and the
rental income is considered the cost of goodwill, employment contract or relationship with em-lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-
going concern value, or any other section 197 ployees or consultants.newed). However, renewal periods are not in-
intangible.cluded if 75% or more of the cost of acquiring the Business books and records, etc. This in-
lease is for the term of the lease remaining on cludes the intangible value of technical manuals,
Section 197 Intangiblesthe acquisition date (not including any period for training manuals or programs, data files, and
which you may choose to renew, extend, or Defined accounting or inventory control systems. It also
continue the lease). includes the cost of customer lists, subscription
The following assets are section 197 intangiblesFor more information on the costs of getting lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,
and must be amortized over 180 months:a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and
chapter 3. television advertisers.1. Goodwill;
Patents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack-How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Part 2. Going concern value; age design, computer software, and any interestVI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza-
3. Workforce in place; in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, ortion that begins during the current year, or on the
other similar property, except as discussed laterappropriate line of your tax return if you are not 4. Business books and records, operating under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-otherwise required to file Form 4562. systems, or any other information base, tangibles.including lists or other information concern-
ing current or prospective customers; Customer-based intangible. This is the com-
position of market, market share, and any other5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-Section 197 Intangibles value resulting from the future provision ofsign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar goods or services because of relationships withitem;Generally, you may amortize the capitalized customers in the ordinary course of business.
costs of ªsection 197 intangiblesº (defined later) 6. A customer-based intangible; For example, you must amortize the part of the
ratably over a 15-year period. You must amor- purchase price of a business that is for the7. A supplier-based intangible;tize these costs if you hold the section 197 existence of the following intangibles.
intangibles in connection with your trade or busi- 8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7); • A customer base.ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc- 9. A license, permit, or other right granted bytion of income. • A circulation base.a governmental unit or agency (including
You may not be able to amortize sec- issuances and renewals); • An undeveloped market or market growth.
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans- 10. A covenant not to compete entered into in • Insurance in force.action that did not result in a significant
CAUTION
! connection with the acquisition of an inter-change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churning • A mortgage servicing contract.est in a trade or business;Rules, later. • An investment management contract.11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name;Your amortization deduction each year is the
and • Any other relationship with customers in-applicable part of the intangible's adjusted basis
volving the future provision of goods or(for purposes of determining gain), figured by 12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest services.amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months). in, any item in this list.
The 15-year period begins with the later of:
Accounts receivable or other similar rights toYou cannot amortize any of the in-• The month the intangible is acquired, or income for goods or services provided to cus-tangibles listed in items (1) through (8) tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-• The month the trade or business or activity that you created rather than acquired
CAUTION
! ness are not section 197 intangibles.engaged in for the production of income unless you created them in acquiring assets that
begins. make up a trade or business or a substantial part Supplier-based intangible. A supplier-based
of a trade or business. intangible is the value resulting from the futureYou cannot deduct amortization for the month
acquisitions, (through contract or other relation-you dispose of the intangible. Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-
ships with suppliers in the ordinary course ofness based on expected continued customerIf you pay or incur an amount that increases business) of goods or services that you will sellpatronage due to its name, reputation, or anythe basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi- or use. The amount you pay or incur for sup-other factor.ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize it plier-based intangibles includes, for example,over the remainder of the 15-year period begin- Going concern value. This is the additional any portion of the purchase price of an acquiredning with the month the basis increase occurs. value of a trade or business that attaches to trade or business that is attributable to the exis-
You are not allowed any other depreciation property because the property is an integral part tence of a favorable relationship with persons
or amortization deduction for an amortizable of an ongoing business activity. It includes value providing distribution services (such as a
section 197 intangible. based on the ability of a business to continue to favorable shelf or display space or a retail out-
function and generate income even though let), or the existence of favorable supply con-Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease. there is a change in ownership (but does not tracts. Do not include any amount required to beThe amortization period for any section 197 in- include any other section 197 intangible). It also paid for the goods or services to honor the termstangible leased under a lease agreement en- includes value based on the immediate use or of the agreement or other relationship. Also, seetered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exempt availability of an acquired trade or business, Assets That Are Not Section 197 Intangiblesorganization, governmental unit, or foreign per- such as the use of earnings during any period in below.son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not which the business would not otherwise be Government-granted license, permit, etc.be less than 125 percent of the lease term. available or operational. This is any right granted by a governmental unit
Cost attributable to other property. The Workforce in place, etc. This includes the or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-
rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to composition of a workforce (for example, its ex- tal unit. For example, you must amortize the
any amount that is included in determining the perience, education, or training). It also includes capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal- 6. An interest under either of the following. • Goodwill.
lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast- • Going concern value.a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-ing license.
ble property. • A covenant not to compete.
Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in- b. A debt that was in existence when the • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.tangibles include a covenant not to compete (or interest was acquired.
• A customer-related information base, cus-similar arrangement) entered into in connection
tomer-based intangible, or similar item.with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or 7. A right to service residential mortgages un-
business, or a substantial portion of a trade or less the right is acquired in connection with
business. An interest in a trade or business the acquisition of a trade or business or a Safe Harbor for Creativeincludes an interest in a partnership or a corpo- substantial part of a trade or business.
Property Costsration engaged in a trade or business. 8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par-An arrangement that requires the former ties to a corporate organization or reorgan- If you are engaged in the trade or business ofowner to perform services (or to provide prop- ization in which any part of a gain or loss is film production, you may be able to amortize theerty or the use of property) is not similar to a not recognized. creative property costs for properties not set forcovenant not to compete to the extent the
production within 3 years of the first capitalizedamount paid under the arrangement represents Intangible property that is not amortizable transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-reasonable compensation for those services or under the rules for section 197 intangibles can bly over a 15-year period beginning on the firstfor that property or its use. be depreciated if it meets certain requirements.
day of the second half of the tax year in whichYou generally must use the straight line method
you properly write off the costs for financial ac-over its useful life. For certain intangibles, theFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A
counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,depreciation period is specified in the law andfranchise, trademark, or trade name is a section
you dispose of the creative property rights, youregulations. For example, the depreciation pe-197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase
must continue to amortize the costs over theriod for computer software that is not a sectionor renewal costs, other than certain contingent
remainder of the 15-year period.197 intangible is generally 36 months.payments that you can deduct currently. For
Creative property costs include costs paid orinformation on currently deductible contingent For more information on depreciating intan-
incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,payments, see chapter 11. gible property, see Intangible Property  under
scripts, story outlines, motion picture productionWhat Method Can You Use To Depreciate YourProfessional sports franchise. A rights to books and plays, and other similarProperty? in chapter 1 of Publication 946.franchise engaged in professional sports and properties for purposes of potential future filmany intangible assets acquired in connection development, production, and exploitation.Computer software. Section 197 intangibleswith acquiring the franchise (including player do not include the following types of computer Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-contracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz- software. enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,able over a 15-year period. see Revenue Procedure 2004-36, 2004-241. Software that meets all the following re- I.R.B. 1063, available at Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, a quirements. www.irs.gov/irb/2004-24_IRB/ar16.html.section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-
a. It is, or has been, readily available fortangibles include any right under a license, con- A change in the treatment of creative
purchase by the general public.tract, or other arrangement providing for the use property costs is a change in method of
of any section 197 intangible. It also includes accounting.
CAUTION
!b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license.any term interest in any section 197 intangible,
c. It has not been substantially modified.whether the interest is outright or in trust.
Anti-Churning RulesThis requirement is considered met if
the cost of all modifications is not moreAssets That Are Not Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizingthan the greater of 25% of the price ofSection 197 Intangibles most section 197 intangibles if the transaction inthe publicly available unmodified
which you acquired them did not result in asoftware or $2,000.The following assets are not section 197 in- significant change in ownership or use. Thesetangibles. rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,2. Software that is not acquired in connection
and to any other section 197 intangible that iswith the acquisition of a trade or business1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership, not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.or a substantial part of a trade or business.trust, or estate.
Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot
2. Any interest under an existing futures con- use 15-year amortization for the intangible if anyComputer software defined. Computertract, foreign currency contract, notional of the following conditions apply.software includes all programs designed toprincipal contract, interest rate swap, or cause a computer to perform a desired function.similar financial contract. 1. You or a related person (defined later) heldIt also includes any database or similar item that
or used the intangible at any time from Julyis in the public domain and is incidental to the3. Any interest in land. 25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.operation of qualifying software.4. Most computer software. (See Computer 2. You acquired the intangible from a personsoftware, later.) Rights of fixed duration or amount. Section who held it at any time during the period in197 intangibles do not include any right under a5. Any of the following assets not acquired in (1) and, as part of the transaction, the usercontract or from a governmental agency if theconnection with the acquisition of a trade did not change.right is acquired in the ordinary course of a tradeor business or a substantial part of a trade 3. You granted the right to use the intangibleor business (or in an activity engaged in for theor business. to a person (or a person related to thatproduction of income) but not as part of a
person) who held or used it at any timea. An interest in a film, sound recording, purchase of a trade or business and either:
during the period in (1). This applies only ifvideo tape, book, or similar property. • Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or the transaction in which you granted theb. A right to receive tangible property or right and the transaction in which you ac-• Is of a fixed amount that, except for theservices under a contract or from a gov- quired the intangible are part of a series ofrules for section 197 intangibles, would beernmental agency. related transactions. See Related person,recovered under a method similar to the
later, for more information.c. An interest in a patent or copyright. unit-of-production method of cost recov-
ery.d. Certain rights that have a fixed duration
Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do notor amount. (See Rights of fixed duration However, this does not apply to the following
apply in the following situations.or amount, later.) intangibles.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You acquired the intangible from a dece- capital or profits interests in the partner- notify you in writing by the due date of the return
ship.dent and its basis was stepped up to its on which the choice is made.
fair market value. • Two persons who are engaged in trades
or businesses under common control (as Anti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-
described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal section 197 intangible acquired in a transactiontion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-
Revenue Code). for which the principal purpose was either of theferor you acquired it from. This exception
following.does not apply if the transaction in which
When to determine relationship. Personsyou acquired the intangible and the trans- • To avoid the requirement that the intangi-are treated as related if the relationship existedaction in which the seller or transferor ac- ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.at the following time.quired it are part of a series of related
• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.transactions. • In the case of a single transaction, imme-
diately before or immediately after the• The gain-recognition exception, discussed transaction in which the intangible was ac- More information. For more informationlater, applies. quired. about the anti-churning rules, including addi-
tional rules for partnerships, see Regulations• In the case of a series of related transac-Related person. For purposes of the section 1.197-2(h).tions (or a series of transactions that com-anti-churning rules, the following are related per- prise a qualified stock purchase undersons. section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Incorrect Amount of 
• An individual and his or her brothers, sis- Code), immediately before the earliest Amortization Deductedters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, transaction or immediately after the last
transaction.ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), If you later discover that you deducted an incor-
and lineal descendants (children, grand- rect amount for amortization for a section 197
Ownership of stock. In determiningchildren, etc.). intangible in any year, you may be able to make
whether an individual directly or indirectly owns a correction for that year by filing an amended• A corporation and an individual who owns, any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the return. See Amended Return, next. If you are notdirectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the following rules apply. allowed to make the correction on an amendedvalue of the corporation's outstanding
return, you can change your accounting methodRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned bystock.
or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust to claim the correct amortization. See Changing
• Two corporations that are members of the is considered owned proportionately by or for its Your Accounting Method, later.same controlled group as defined in sec- shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownCode, except that ªmore than 20%º is sub- Amended Returnthe stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisstituted for ªat least 80%º in that definition or her family. Family includes only brothers and If you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti-and the determination is made without re- sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, zation, you can file an amended return to correctgard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of ancestors, and lineal descendants. the following.section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.) Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by • A mathematical error made in any year.applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more • A posting error made in any year.considered to own the stock directly or indirectlythan 20% of the value of the corporation's owned by or for his or her partner. • An amortization deduction for a sectionoutstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
197 intangible for which you have notRule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the
adopted a method of accounting.or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-trust.
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci- person. Do not treat stock constructively owned When to file. If an amended return is allowed,ary and beneficiary, of any trust. by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by you must file it by the later of the following dates.the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and
• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-another person the constructive owner of thethe fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-
nal return for the year in which you did notstock.ferent trusts, if the same person is the
deduct the correct amount. (A return filedgrantor of both trusts.
early is considered filed on the due date.)Gain-recognition exception. This exception• The executor and beneficiary of an estate. to the anti-churning rules applies if the person • 2 years from the time you paid your tax foryou acquired the intangible from (the transferor)• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or- that year.meets both of the following requirements.ganization and a person who directly or
indirectly controls the organization (or • That person would not be related to you Changing Yourwhose family members control it). (as described under Related person, ear- Accounting Methodlier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock• A corporation and a partnership if the
and partnership interests were replaced bysame persons own more than 20% of the Generally, you must get IRS approval to changea 50% test.value of the outstanding stock of the cor- your method of accounting. File Form 3115,
poration and more than 20% of the capital Application for Change in Accounting Method, to• That person chose to recognize gain on
or profits interest in the partnership. request a change to a permissible method ofthe disposition of the intangible and pay
accounting for amortization.income tax on the gain at the highest tax• Two S corporations, and an S corporation
rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for The following are examples of a change inand a regular corporation, if the same per-
information on making this choice. method of accounting for amortization.sons own more than 20% of the value of
the outstanding stock of each corporation. • A change in the amortization method, pe-If this exception applies, the anti-churning
riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-• Two partnerships if the same persons rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted
tizable asset.own, directly or indirectly, more than 20% basis in the intangible that is more than the gain
of the capital or profits interests in both recognized by the transferor. • A change in the accounting for amortiz-partnerships. able assets from a single asset account toNotification. If the person you acquired the
a multiple asset account (pooling), or vice• A partnership and a person who owns, intangible from chooses to recognize gain under
versa.directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the the rules for this exception, that person must
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A change in the accounting for amortiz- loss. For more information on ordinary or capital tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7.
able assets from one type of multiple as- gain or loss on business property, see chapter 3 You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs
set account to a different type of multiple in Publication 544. that are not deducted currently over an
asset account. 84-month period. There is no limit on the amount
Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct any of your amortization deduction for reforestation
loss on the disposition or worthlessness of aChanges in amortization that are not a change costs paid or incurred during the tax year.
section 197 intangible that you acquired in thein method of accounting include the following: The election to amortize reforestation costs
same transaction (or series of related transac- incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-• A change in computing amortization in the tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-tax year in which your use of the asset have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, orchanges. each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi- beneficiary cannot make that election.
ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible• An adjustment in the useful life of an am- A partner's or shareholder's share of amor-
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-ortizable asset. tizable costs is figured under the general rules
deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi- for allocating items of income, loss, deduction,• Generally, the making of a late amortiza- ble by the following fraction. etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-tion election or the revocation of a timely ortizable costs of an estate are divided between• The numerator is the adjusted basis ofvalid amortization election. the estate and the income beneficiary based oneach remaining intangible on the date of
• Any change in the placed-in-service date the income of the estate allocable to each.the disposition.
of an amortizable asset.
• The denominator is the total adjusted ba- Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are the
ses of all remaining amortizable section direct costs of planting or seeding for forestationSee Regulations section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii)(a)
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi- or reforestation. Qualifying costs include onlyfor more information and examples.
tion. those costs you must capitalize and include in
Automatic approval. In some instances, you the adjusted basis of the property. They include
may be able to get automatic approval from the costs for the following items.Covenant not to compete. A covenant not toIRS to change your method of accounting for compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid- • Site preparation.amortization. For a list of automatic accounting ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-method changes, see the Instructions for Form • Seeds or seedlings.pose of your entire interest in the trade or3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115 business for which you entered into the cove- • Labor.for more information on getting approval, auto- nant.matic approval procedures, and a list of excep- • Tools.
tions to the automatic approval process. Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a • Depreciation on equipment used in plant-For more information, see Revenue Proce- section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans- ing and seeding.dure 2006-12, as modified by Revenue Proce- fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect
dure 2006-37, and Revenue Procedure to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi- Qualifying costs do not include costs for which2008-52, as amplified, clarified, and modified by ble that is not more than the transferor's ad- the government reimburses you under aRevenue Procedure 2009-39, as clarified and justed basis. You amortize this part of the cost-sharing program, unless you include themodified by Revenue Procedure 2011-14, as adjusted basis over the intangible's remaining reimbursement in your income.modified and amplified by Revenue Procedure amortization period in the hands of the trans-
2011-22. See Revenue Procedure 2006-12, feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers Qualified timber property. Qualified timber
2006-3 I.R.B. 310, available at to a corporation, partnership contributions and property is property that contains trees in signifi-
www.irs.gov/irb/2006-03_IRB/ar14.html. distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun- cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot
See Revenue Procedure 2006-37, 2006-38 tary conversions. or other site that you own or lease. The property
I.R.B. 499, available at In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con- qualifies only if it meets all of the following re-
www.irs.gov/irb/2006-38_IRB/ar10.html. version of a section 197 intangible, you must quirements.
See Revenue Procedure 2008-52, 2008-36 continue to amortize the part of your adjusted • It is located in the United States.I.R.B. 587, available at basis in the acquired intangible that is not more
www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.html. than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or • It is held for the growing and cutting of
See Revenue Procedure 2009-39, 2009-38 converted intangible over the remaining amorti- timber you will either use in, or sell for use
I.R.B. 371, available at zation period of the exchanged or converted in, the commercial production of timber
www.irs.gov/irb/2009-38_IRB/ar08.html. intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period products.
See Revenue Procedure 2011-14, 2011-4 I.R.B. the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired • It consists of at least one acre planted with330, available at intangible that is more than your adjusted basis tree seedlings in the manner normallywww.irs.gov/irb/2011-04_IRB/ar08.html. in the exchanged or converted intangible. used in forestation or reforestation.See Revenue Procedure 2011-22, 2011-18
I.R.B. 737, available at Example. You own a section 197 intangible Qualified timber property does not includewww.irs.gov/irb/2011-18_IRB/ar08.html. you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a property on which you have planted shelter beltsremaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kindDisposition of
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-Section 197 Intangibles Amortization period. The 84-month amorti-visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- zation period starts on the first day of the firsttize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of theA section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia- month of the second half of the tax year youacquired intangible over the 11 years remainingble property used in your trade or business. If incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-in the original 15-year amortization period for theyou held the intangible for more than 1 year, any payer), regardless of the month you actuallytransferred asset. You amortize the othergain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow- incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-yearable amortization, is ordinary income (section ductions for no more than 6 months of the firstperiod. For more information, see Regulations1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangibles and last (eighth) tax years of the period.section 1.197-2(g).are disposed of in a single transaction or a
series of related transactions, treat all of the Life tenant and remainderman. If one per-
section 197 intangibles as if they were a single son holds the property for life with the remainder
asset for purposes of determining the amount of going to another person, the life tenant is entitled
gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-Reforestation Costs
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. If tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-
you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gain You can elect to deduct a limited amount of mainder interest in the property is ignored for
or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain or reforestation costs paid or incurred during the amortization purposes.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber for costs paid or incurred after December 19, • If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the
property within 10 years after the tax year you 2007). facility, only the basis attributable to the
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report construction, reconstruction, or erectionIf you retire or abandon the property duringany gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza- completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.the amortization period, no amortization deduc-tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544 tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban-for more information. Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo-donment.
ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a
pollution control facility by 20% before figuringHow to make the election. To elect to amor-
the amortization deduction.tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part
VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that
Pollution Controlcontains the following information. More information. For more information on
the amortization of pollution control facilities,• A description of the costs and the dates Facilities
see Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re-you incurred them.
lated regulations.You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified• A description of the type of timber being
pollution control facility over 60 months. How-grown and the purpose for which it is
ever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilitiesgrown.
for an exception. The cost of a pollution control
Attach a separate statement for each property facility that is not eligible for amortization can be Research andfor which you amortize reforestation costs. depreciated under the regular rules for deprecia-
tion. Also, you can claim a special depreciation Experimental CostsGenerally, you must make the election on a
allowance on a certified pollution control facilitytimely filed return (including extensions) for the
that is qualified property even if you elect to You can elect to amortize your research andtax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
amortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am- experimental costs, deduct them as currentever, if you timely filed your return for the year
ortizable basis) by the amount of any special business expenses, or write them off over awithout making the election, you can still make
allowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica- 10-year period (see Optional write-off methodthe election by filing an amended return within 6
tion 946. below).months of the due date of the return (excluding
extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state- If you elect to amortize these costs, deductA certified pollution control facility is a newment to the amended return and write ªFiled them in equal amounts over 60 months or more.identifiable treatment facility used in connectionpursuant to section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. The amortization period begins the month youwith a plant or other property in operation beforeFile the amended return at the same address first receive an economic benefit from the costs.1976, to reduce or control water or atmosphericyou filed the original return. pollution or contamination. The facility must do For a definition of ªresearch and experimen-
so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, or tal costsº and information on deducting them as
preventing the creation or emission of pollu-Revoking the election. You must get IRS ap- current business expenses, see chapter 7.
tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facilityproval to revoke your election to amortize quali-
must be certified by state and federal certifyingfying reforestation costs. Your application to Optional write-off method. Rather thanauthorities.revoke the election must include your name, amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-address, the years for which your election was in The facility must not significantly increase rent expense, you have the option of deductingeffect, and your reason for revoking it. Please the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or (writing off) research and experimental costsprovide your daytime telephone number (op- reduce the total operating costs of the plant or ratably over a 10-year period beginning with thetional), in case we need to contact you. You, or other property. Also, it must not significantly tax year in which you incurred the costs. Foryour duly authorized representative, must sign change the nature of the manufacturing or pro- more information, see Optional Write-off of Cer-the application and file it at least 90 days before duction process or facility. tain Tax Preferences, later, and section 59(e) ofthe due date (without extensions) for filing your the Internal Revenue Code.income tax return for the first tax year for which The federal certifying authority will not certify
your election is to end. your property to the extent it appears you will
recover (over the property's useful life) all or part Costs you can amortize. You can amortize of its cost from the profit based on its operation costs chargeable to a capital account (see chap-
(such as through sales of recovered wastes). ter 1) if you meet both of the following require-Send the application to:
 The federal certifying authority will describe the ments.Internal Revenue Service nature of the potential cost recovery. You mustAssociate Chief Counsel • You paid or incurred the costs in yourthen reduce the amortizable basis of the facilityPassthroughs and Special Industries trade or business.by this potential recovery.CC:PSI:6
• You are not deducting the costs currently.1111 Constitution Ave., NW, IR-5300 New identifiable treatment facility. A new
Washington, DC 20224 identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-
ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment How to make the election. To elect to amor-
facility. It does not include a building and its tize research and experimental costs, complete
structural components unless the building is ex- Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-
clusively a treatment facility. come tax return. Generally, you must file theGeological and return by the due date (including extensions).
However, if you timely filed your return for theAtmospheric pollution control facilities.Geophysical Costs year without making the election, you can stillCertain atmospheric pollution control facilities make the election by filing an amended returnYou can amortize the cost of geological and can be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, within 6 months of the due date of the returngeophysical expenses paid or incurred in con- the following must apply. (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to thenection with oil and gas exploration or develop- • The facility must be acquired and placed amended return and write ªFiled pursuant toment within the United States. These costs can in service after April 11, 2005. If acquired, section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File thebe amortized ratably over a 24-month period the original use must begin with you after amended return at the same address you filedbeginning on the mid-point of the tax year in April 11, 2005. the original return.which the expenses were paid or incurred. For
major integrated oil companies (as defined in • The facility must be used in connection Your election is binding for the year it is
section 167(h)(5)), these costs must be amor- with an electric generation plant or other made and for all later years unless you obtain
tized ratably over a 5-year period for costs paid property placed in operation after Decem- approval from the IRS to change to a different
or incurred after May 17, 2006 (a 7-year period ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired. method.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 33 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individuals, corporations, estates, and
trusts who claim depletion deductionsOptional Write-off 
may be liable for alternative minimum
CAUTION
!
9. tax.of Certain Tax
Basis adjustment for depletion. You must
Preferences reduce the basis of your property by the deple-
tion allowed or allowable, whichever is greater.DepletionYou can elect to amortize certain tax preference
items over an optional period beginning in the
tax year in which you incurred the costs. If you
make this election, there is no AMT adjustment.
What's New Mineral PropertyThe applicable costs and the optional recovery
periods are as follows:
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells,Oil and gas from marginal properties. The• Circulation costs Ð 3 years, mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-temporary suspension of the 100% taxable in-
othermal deposits). For this purpose, the termcome limit on percentage depletion on oil and• Intangible drilling and development costs
ªpropertyº means each separate interest younatural gas produced from marginal propertiesÐ 60 months,
applies to depletion in tax years beginning in own in each mineral deposit in each separate• Mining exploration and development costs 2010 or 2011. See Taxable income limit  under tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or moreÐ 10 years, and Oil and Gas Wells in this chapter. separate interests as one property or as sepa-
• Research and experimental costs Ð 10 rate properties. See section 614 of the Internal
years. Revenue Code and the related regulations for
rules on how to treat separate mineral interests.
IntroductionHow to make the election. To elect to amor- There are two ways of figuring depletion on
tize qualifying costs over the optional recovery mineral property.Depletion is the using up of natural resources byperiod, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at- mining, drilling, quarrying stone, or cutting tim- • Cost depletion.tach a statement containing the following infor- ber. The depletion deduction allows an owner ormation to your return for the tax year in which the • Percentage depletion.operator to account for the reduction of a prod-election begins: uct's reserves. Generally, you must use the method that gives
• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi- There are two ways of figuring depletion: you the larger deduction. However, unless you
cation number; and cost depletion and percentage depletion. For are an independent producer or royalty owner,
mineral property, you generally must use the you generally cannot use percentage depletion• The type of cost and the specific amount method that gives you the larger deduction. For for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells ,of the cost for which you are making the standing timber, you must use cost depletion. later.election.
TopicsGenerally, the election must be made on a Cost DepletionThis chapter discusses:timely filed return (including extensions) for the
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How- To figure cost depletion you must first determine
• Who can claim depletionever, if you timely filed your return for the year the following.
without making the election, you can still make • Mineral property • The property's basis for depletion.the election by filing an amended return within 6
• Timbermonths of the due date of the return (excluding • The total recoverable units of mineral in
extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended the property's natural deposit.
return and write ªFiled pursuant to section • The number of units of mineral sold during301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the amended the tax year.return at the same address you filed the original
return. Who Can
Basis for depletion. To figure the property'sRevoking the election. You must obtain con- Claim Depletion? basis for depletion, subtract all the followingsent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your
from the property's adjusted basis.request to revoke the election must be submit- If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before 1. Amounts recoverable through:erty or standing timber, you can take a deductionthe end of the tax year in which the optional for depletion. More than one person can have anrecovery period ends. The request must contain a. Depreciation deductions,economic interest in the same mineral deposit orall of the information necessary to demonstrate timber. In the case of leased property, the deple- b. Deferred expenses (including deferredthe rare and unusual circumstances that would tion deduction is divided between the lessor and exploration and development costs),justify granting revocation. If the request for rev- the lessee. andocation is approved, any unamortized costs are You have an economic interest if both thedeductible in the year the revocation is effective. c. Deductions other than depletion.following apply.
• You have acquired by investment any in- 2. The residual value of land and improve-
terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- ments at the end of operations.
ber. 3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-
• You have a legal right to income from the poses other than mineral production.
extraction of the mineral or cutting of the
timber to which you must look for a return Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of your
of your capital investment. property is your original cost or other basis, plus
certain additions and improvements, and minusA contractual relationship that allows you an
certain deductions such as depletion allowed oreconomic or monetary advantage from products
allowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedof the mineral deposit or standing timber is not,
basis can never be less than zero. See Publica-in itself, an economic interest. A production pay-
tion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,
on adjusted basis.mineral property is not an economic interest.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total recoverable units. The total recover- return for the first tax year for which the safe • Deductible taxes (see chapter 5), but not
able units is the sum of the following. harbor is elected. The statement must indicate taxes that you capitalize or take as a
that you are electing the safe harbor provided by credit.• The number of units of mineral remaining Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, ifat the end of the year (including units re- • Losses sustained.made, is effective for the tax year in which it iscovered but not sold). made and all later years. It cannot be revoked The following rules apply when figuring your• The number of units of mineral sold during for the tax year in which it is elected, but may be taxable income from the property for purposesthe tax year (determined under your revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it cannot of the taxable income limit.method of accounting, as explained next). be re-elected for the next 5 years.
• Do not deduct any net operating loss de-
You must estimate or determine recoverable duction from the gross income from thePercentage Depletion
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands property.
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod- To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a • Corporations do not deduct charitable con-ucts using the current industry method and the certain percentage, specified for each mineral, tributions from the gross income from themost accurate and reliable information you can by your gross income from the property during property.obtain. You must include ores and minerals that the tax year.
• If, during the year, you dispose of an itemare developed, in sight, blocked out, or assured. The rates to be used and other rules for oil
of section 1245 property that was used inYou must also include probable or prospective and gas wells are discussed later under Inde-
connection with mineral property, reduceores or minerals that are believed to exist based pendent Producers and Royalty Owners  and
any allowable deduction for mining ex-on good evidence. But see Elective safe harbor under Natural Gas Wells. Rates and other rules
penses by the part of any gain you mustfor owners of oil and gas property, later. for percentage depletion of other specific miner-
report as ordinary income that is allocableals are found later in Mines and GeothermalNumber of units sold. You determine the to the mineral property. See sectionDeposits.number of units sold during the tax year based 1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-on your method of accounting. Use the following Gross income. When figuring percentage de- mation on how to figure the ordinary gaintable to make this determination. pletion, subtract from your gross income from allocable to the property.
the property the following amounts.IF you THEN the units sold
use ... during the year are ... • Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred Oil and Gas Wells
for the property.The cash The units sold for which You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oilmethod of you receive payment • The part of any bonus you paid for a lease or gas well unless at least one of the followingaccounting during the tax year on the property allocable to the product applies.(regardless of the year of sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
sale). income) for the tax year. • You are either an independent producer or
a royalty owner.An accrual The units sold based on A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as
method of your inventories and a lessee to satisfy a production payment re- • The well produces natural gas that is ei-accounting method of accounting for tained by the lessor. ther sold under a fixed contract or pro-inventory. duced from geopressured brine.Use the following fraction to figure the part of
the bonus you must subtract.The number of units sold during the tax year If you are an independent producer or royalty
does not include any for which depletion deduc- owner, see Independent Producers and RoyaltyNo. of units sold in the tax yeartions were allowed or allowable in earlier years. Bonus Owners, next.Recoverable units from the × Payments For information on the depletion deductionFiguring the cost depletion deduction. property
for wells that produce natural gas that is eitherOnce you have figured your property's basis for For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos- sold under a fixed contract or produced fromdepletion, the total recoverable units, and the its, more information about the definition of geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells ,number of units sold during the tax year, you can gross income from the property is under Oil and later.figure your cost depletion deduction by taking Gas Wells, later. For other property, more infor-the following steps. mation about the definition of gross income from
the property is under Mines and Geothermal Independent Producers andStep Action Result Deposits, later. Royalty Owners 1 Divide your property's Rate per
Taxable income limit. The percentage deple-basis for depletion by unit. If you are an independent producer or royalty
total recoverable units. tion deduction generally cannot be more than owner, you figure percentage depletion using a
50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop- 2 Multiply the rate per Cost taxable income from the property figured without erty based on your average daily production ofunit by units sold depletion the depletion deduction and the domestic pro- domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toduring the tax year. deduction. duction activities deduction. your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-
Taxable income from the property means ever, certain refiners, as explained next, andYou must keep accounts for the depletion of gross income from the property minus all allowa- certain retailers and transferees of proven oileach property and adjust these accounts each ble deductions (except any deduction for deple- and gas properties, as explained next, cannotyear for units sold and depletion claimed. tion or domestic production activities) claim percentage depletion. For information on
Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas attributable to mining processes, including min- figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage
property. Instead of using the method de- ing transportation. These deductible items in- depletion, later.
scribed earlier to determine the total recoverable clude, but are not limited to, the following.
units, you can use an elective safe harbor. If you Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-• Operating expenses.choose the elective safe harbor, the total recov- pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
erable units equal 105% of a property's proven tion if you or a related person refine crude oil and• Certain selling expenses.
reserves (both developed and undeveloped). you and the related person refined more than• Administrative and financial overhead.For details, see Revenue Procedure 2004-19 on 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax year
page 563 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-10, based on average (rather than actual) daily re-• Depreciation.
available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-10. finery runs for the tax year. The average daily• Intangible drilling and development costs.pdf. refinery run is computed by dividing total refinery
To make the election, attach a statement to • Exploration and development expendi- runs for the tax year by the total number of days
your timely filed (including extensions) original tures. in the tax year.
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Related person. You and another person Related person. To determine if you and for your net profits interest, you must first deter-
another person are related persons, see Re- mine your percentage participation (as mea-are related persons if either of you holds a signif-
lated person under Refiners who cannot claim sured by the net profits) in the gross revenueicant ownership interest in the other person or if
percentage depletion, earlier. from the property. To figure this percentage, youa third person holds a significant ownership in-
divide the income you receive for your net profitsterest in both of you. Sales through a related person. You are interest by the gross revenue from the property.considered to be selling through a related per-For example, a corporation, partnership, es- Then multiply the total production from the prop-son if any sale by the related person producestate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant erty by your percentage participation to figuregross income from which you may benefit be-ownership interest in it are related persons. A your share of the production.cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-partnership and a trust are related persons if one est in the person.person holds a significant ownership interest in Example. John Oak owns oil property in
You are not considered to be selling through which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.each of them. a related person who is a retailer if all the follow- During the year, the property produced 10,000For purposes of the related person rules, ing apply. barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.significant ownership interest means direct or John had expenses of $90,000 attributable to• You do not have a significant ownershipindirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of the property. The property generated a net profitinterest in the retailer.the following. of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-• You sell your production to persons who ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 ×  .20) for• The value of the outstanding stock of a are not related to either you or the retailer. his net profits interest.corporation.
Paul determined his percentage participation• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas• The interest in the profits or capital of a to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income hefrom your customers or persons related topartnership. received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue fromyour customers.
the property). Paul determined his share of the• The beneficial interests in an estate or • There are no arrangements for the retailer oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-trust. to acquire oil or natural gas you produced rels ×  11%).for resale or made available for purchaseAny interest owned by or for a corporation, by the retailer. Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen-partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-• Neither you nor the retailer knows of orowned directly both by itself and proportionately rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity iscontrols the final disposition of the oil orby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. 6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number ofnatural gas you sold or the original source barrels of your depletable oil quantity that youof the petroleum products the retailer ac- choose to apply. If you claim depletion on bothRetailers who cannot claim percentage de- quired for resale. oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-tion if both the following apply. Transferees who cannot claim percentage ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de- natural gas quantity.1. You sell oil or natural gas or their
pletion if you received your interest in a provenby-products directly or through a related
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and Example. You have both oil and natural gasperson in any of the following situations. before October 12, 1990. For a definition of the production. To figure your depletable natural
term ªtransfer,º see section 1.613A-7(n) of thea. Through a retail outlet operated by you gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of
regulations. For a definition of the term ªinterest your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Youror a related person.
in proven oil or gas property,º see section depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 millionb. To any person who is required under an 1.613A-7(p) of the regulations. cubic feet of gas (360 ×  6000). You must reduceagreement with you or a related person your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000to use a trademark, trade name, or Figuring percentage depletion. Generally, − 360).
service mark or name owned by you or as an independent producer or royalty owner,  If you have production from marginal wells,
you figure your percentage depletion by comput-a related person in marketing or distrib- see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue
ing your average daily production of domestic oiluting oil, natural gas, or their Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas
or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil orby-products. quantity.
gas quantity. If your average daily productionc. To any person given authority under an Business entities and family members.does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-
You must allocate the depletable oil or gasagreement with you or a related person tity, you figure your percentage depletion by
quantity among the following related persons into occupy any retail outlet owned, multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas
proportion to each entity's or family member'sleased, or controlled by you or a related property (defined later) by 15%. If your average
production of domestic oil or gas for the year.person. daily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must • Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or
2. The combined gross receipts from sales make an allocation as explained later under Av- more of the beneficial interest is owned by
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or erage daily production exceeds depletable the same or related persons (considering
quantities.their by-products by all retail outlets taken only persons that own at least 5% of the
into account in (1) are more than $5 million In addition, there is a limit on the percentage beneficial interest).
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,for the tax year. • You and your spouse and minor children.later.For the purpose of determining if this rule A related person is anyone mentioned in theapplies, do not count the following. Average daily production. Figure your aver- related persons discussion under Nondeduct-
age daily production by dividing your total do- ible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, except• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)
mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by that for purposes of this allocation, item (1) inof oil or natural gas to commercial or in-
the number of days in your tax year. that discussion includes only an individual, his ordustrial users.
her spouse, and minor children.Partial interest. If you have a partial inter-• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-
est in the production from a property, figure your Controlled group of corporations. Mem-ment of Defense. share of the production by multiplying total pro- bers of the same controlled group of corpora-
• Sales of oil or natural gas or their duction from the property by your percentage of tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuring
by-products outside the United States if interest in the revenues from the property. the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. They
none of your domestic production or that You have a partial interest in the production share the depletable quantity. A controlled
of a related person is exported during the from a property if you have a net profits interest group of corporations is defined in section
tax year or the prior tax year. in the property. To figure the share of production 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, except
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that, for this purpose, the stock ownership re- gas from marginal properties. For more informa- limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-
quirement in that definition is ªmore than 50%º tion, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Rev- tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's inter-
rather than ªat least 80%.º enue Code. est in the partnership is not affected by the
depletion allowance.
Gross income from the property. For pur- An electing large partnership is one thatPartnerships and S Corporationsposes of percentage depletion, gross income meets both the following requirements.
from the property (in the case of oil and gas Generally, each partner or S corporation share- • The partnership had 100 or more partnerswells) is the amount you receive from the sale of holder, and not the partnership or S corporation, in the preceding year.the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. figures the depletion allowance separately.If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, • The partnership chooses to be an electing(However, see Electing large partnerships mustbut manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- large partnership.figure depletion allowance, later.) Each partneruct before sale or transport it before sale, the or shareholder must decide whether to use costgross income from the property is the represen- Disqualified persons. An electing largeor percentage depletion. If a partner or share-tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or partnership does not figure the depletion allow-holder uses percentage depletion, he or shegas, before conversion or transportation. ance of its partners that are disqualified per-must apply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit us-If you sold gas after you removed it from the sons. Disqualified persons must figure iting his or her taxable income from all sources.premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP, themselves, as explained earlier.determine gross income from the property for All the following are disqualified persons.percentage depletion purposes without regard Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis.
to the RMFP. The partnership or S corporation must allocate • Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-
Gross income from the property does not to each partner or shareholder his or her share pletion (discussed under Independent Pro-
include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
other amounts payable without regard to pro- held by the partnership or S corporation. The • Retailers who cannot claim percentageduction from the property. partnership or S corporation makes the alloca- depletion (discussed under Independenttion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas
Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier).property.Average daily production exceeds deplet-
able quantities. If your average daily produc- • Any partner whose average daily produc-Each partner's share of the adjusted basis oftion for the year is more than your depletable oil tion of domestic crude oil and natural gasthe oil or gas property generally is figured ac-or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for is more than 500 barrels during the taxcording to that partner's interest in partnershipdepletion for each domestic oil or natural gas year in which the partnership tax yearcapital. However, in some cases, it is figuredproperty as follows. ends. Average daily production is dis-according to the partner's interest in partnership
income. cussed earlier.1. Figure your average daily production of oil
The partnership or S corporation adjusts theor natural gas for the year.
partner's or shareholder's share of the adjusted Natural Gas Wells2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas basis of the oil and gas property for any capitalquantity for the year. You can use percentage depletion for a well thatexpenditures made for the property and for any
produces natural gas that is eitherchange in partnership or S corporation interests.3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas
produced from the property using a per- • Sold under a fixed contract, orRecordkeeping.  Each partner orcentage depletion rate of 15%. shareholder must separately keep rec- • Produced from geopressured brine.ords of his or her share of the adjusted4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-
RECORDS
basis in each oil and gas property of the partner-tion, the numerator of which is the result
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract.ship or S corporation. The partner or share-figured in (2) and the denominator of which
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesholder must reduce his or her adjusted basis byis the result figured in (1). This is your
for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isthe depletion allowed or allowable on the prop-depletion allowance for that property for
erty each year. The partner or shareholder must domestic natural gas sold by the producer underthe year.
use that reduced adjusted basis to figure cost a contract that does not provide for a price in-
depletion or his or her gain or loss if the partner- crease to reflect any increase in the seller's taxTaxable income limit. If you are an indepen- ship or S corporation disposes of the property. liability because of the repeal of percentage de-dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, pletion for gas. The contract must have been inReporting the deduction. Information thatyour deduction for percentage depletion is lim- effect from February 1, 1975, until the date ofyou, as a partner or shareholder, use to figureited to the smaller of the following. your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper- sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,
• 100% of your taxable income from the ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- 1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax
property figured without the deduction for tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on liability into account unless demonstrated other-
depletion and the deduction for domestic Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas wise by clear and convincing evidence.
production activities under section 199 of depletion for your partnership or S corporation
the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini- interest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple- Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual-tion of taxable income from the property, tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur- ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-see Taxable income limit, earlier, under ing income or loss from rental real estate or gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.Mineral Property. royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule This is natural gas that is both the following.E explain where to report this income or loss and• 65% of your taxable income from all • Produced from a well you began to drillwhether you need to file either of the followingsources, figured without the depletion al- after September 1978 and before 1984.forms.lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-
• Determined in accordance with sectionduction activities, any net operating loss • Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
carryback, and any capital loss carryback. 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- to be produced from geopressured brine.You can carry over to the following year any tions.
amount you cannot deduct because of the
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de- Mines and GeothermalElecting large partnerships must figure de-pletion allowance (before applying any limits) for pletion allowance. An electing large partner- Depositsthe following year. ship, rather than each partner, generally must
Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,For tax years beginning after 2008 and before figure the depletion allowance. The partnership
including geothermal deposits, qualify for per-2012, the 100% taxable income limit does not figures the depletion allowance without taking
centage depletion.apply to percentage depletion on oil and natural into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-income
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat- waste or residue of prior mining. This does not Lessor's Gross Income
ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- apply to extraction from waste or residue of prior
come from the property that you can deduct as In the case of leased property, the depletionmining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
depletion depends on the type of deposit. deduction is divided between the lessor and theor the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
lessee.The following is a list of the percentage de- minerals from the waste or residue.
A lessor's gross income from the propertypletion rates for the more common minerals. Treatment processes. The processes in- that qualifies for percentage depletion usually is
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralDEPOSITS RATE the total of the royalties received from the lease.
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatment
Sulphur, uranium, and, if from processes must be applied by the mine owner or Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonuses
deposits in the United States, and advanced royalties are payments a lesseeoperator. For a listing of treatment processesasbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickel makes before production to a lessor for the grantconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofore, and mica ............ . 22% of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tothe Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-
be extracted from leased property. If you are theGold, silver, copper, iron ore, and lations.
lessor, your income from bonuses and ad-certain oil shale, if from deposits in
Transportation of more than 50 miles. Ifthe United States .......... . 15% vanced royalties received is subject to an allow-
the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be ance for depletion, as explained in the next twoBorax, granite, limestone, marble, transported more than 50 miles to plants or mills paragraphs.mollusk shells, potash, slate,
to be treated because of physical and othersoapstone, and carbon dioxide Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de-requirements, the additional authorized trans-produced from a well ....... . 14% pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis
portation is considered mining and included in in the property by a fraction, the numerator ofCoal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10% the computation of gross income from mining. which is the bonus and the denominator of whichClay and shale used or sold for is the total bonus and royalties expected to beIf you wish to include transportation ofuse in making sewer pipe or bricks received. To figure cost depletion on advancedmore than 50 miles in the computationor used or sold for use as sintered royalties, use the computation explained earlierof gross income from mining, requestor burned lightweight aggregates 71/2%
 under Cost Depletion, treating the number ofan advance ruling from the IRS. Include in theClay used or sold for use in units for which the advanced royalty is receivedrequest the facts about the physical and othermaking drainage and roofing tile, as the number of units sold.requirements that prevented the constructionflower pots, and kindred products,
Figuring percentage depletion. In theand operation of the plant within 50 miles of theand gravel, sand, and stone (other
case of mines, wells, and other natural depositspoint of extraction. For more information aboutthan stone used or sold for use by
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, youa mine owner or operator as requesting an advance ruling, see Revenue Pro-
may use the percentage rates discussed earlierdimension or ornamental stone) 5% cedure 2012-1, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo-2012-01_IRB/ar06.html. nus or advanced royalty payments are generallyYou can find a complete list of minerals and
part of the gross income from the property totheir percentage depletion rates in section
which the rates are applied in making the calcu-613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take
lation. However, for oil, gas, or geothermal prop-a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal. erty, gross income does not include leaseor iron ore mined in the United States if both theThe percentage depletion deduction of a corpo- bonuses, advanced royalties, or other amountsfollowing apply.ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) is payable without regard to production from thereduced by 20% of: • You disposed of it after holding it for more property.
• The percentage depletion deduction for than 1 year. Ending the lease. If you receive a bonus onthe tax year (figured without this reduc- a lease that ends or is abandoned before you• You disposed of it under a contract undertion), minus derive any income from mineral extraction, in-which you retain an economic interest in
• The adjusted basis of the property at the clude in income the depletion deduction youthe coal or iron ore.
close of the tax year (figured without the took. Do this for the year the lease ends or isTreat any gain on the disposition as a capitaldepletion deduction for the tax year). abandoned. Also increase your adjusted basis
gain. in the property to restore the depletion deduction
you previously subtracted.Disposal to related person. This rule doesGross income from the property. For prop-
For advanced royalties, include in incomenot apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toerty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil or
the depletion claimed on minerals for which thegas well, gross income from the property means one of the following persons.
advanced royalties were paid if the mineralsthe gross income from mining. Mining includes • A related person (as listed in chapter 2 of were not produced before the lease ended. In-all the following. Publication 544). clude this amount in income for the year the
• Extracting ores or minerals from the lease ends. Increase your adjusted basis in the• A person owned or controlled by the sameground. property by the amount you include in income.interests that own or control you.
• Applying certain treatment processes de-
Delay rentals. These are payments for defer-scribed later. Geothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits ring development of the property. Since delay
• Transporting ores or minerals (generally, located in the United States or its possessions rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-
not more than 50 miles) from the point of come that is not subject to depletion. Thesequalify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. A
extraction to the plants or mills in which rentals can be avoided by either abandoning thegeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofthe treatment processes are applied. lease, beginning development operations, ornatural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid
obtaining production.or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, aExcise tax. Gross income from mining in- geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.cludes the separately stated excise tax received
Figure gross income from the property for aby a mine operator from the sale of coal to
compensate the operator for the excise tax the geothermal steam well in the same way as for oil Timbermine operator must pay to finance black lung and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-
benefits. erty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent- You can figure timber depletion only by the cost
age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotExtraction. Extracting ores or minerals method. Percentage depletion does not apply to
be more than 50% of your taxable income fromfrom the ground includes extraction by mine timber. Base your depletion on your cost or other
the property.owners or operators of ores or minerals from the basis in the timber. Your cost does not include
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 37

Page 38 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Electing to treat the cutting of timber as athe cost of land or any amounts recoverable Useful Items
sale or exchange. You can elect, under cer-through depreciation. You may want to see:
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timberDepletion takes place when you cut standing
Publicationheld for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.timber. You can figure your depletion deduction
You must make the election on your income taxwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accurately ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomereturn for the tax year to which it applies. If youmeasured in the process of exploitation.
make this election, subtract the adjusted basis ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
for depletion from the fair market value of the Individuals, Estates, and TrustsFiguring cost depletion. To figure your cost
depletion allowance, you multiply the number of timber on the first day of the tax year in which ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions oftimber units cut by your depletion unit. you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting. AssetsYou generally report the gain as long-term capi-Timber units. When you acquire timber ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensestal gain. The fair market value then becomesproperty, you must make an estimate of the
your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss ❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appealquantity of marketable timber that exists on the
on the sale or other disposition of the products Rights, and Claims for Refundproperty. You measure the timber using board
cut from the timber. For more information, seefeet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later
Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Sales See chapter 12 for information about gettingdetermine that you have more or less units of
and Other Dispositions of Assets. publications and forms.timber, you must adjust the original estimate.
You may revoke an election to treat the cut-The term ªtimber propertyº means your eco-
ting of timber as a sale or exchange withoutnomic interest in standing timber in each tract or
block representing a separate timber account. IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca-
Definition of Businesstion) is disregarded for purposes of making aDepletion unit. You figure your depletion subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For-unit each year by taking the following steps. Bad Debtest Activities Schedule, for more information.
1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-the timber on hand at the beginning of the lessness of a debt that was either:Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber)year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost to your income tax return if you claim a deduc- • Created or acquired in your trade or busi-Depletion in the discussion on Mineral tion for timber depletion, choose to treat the ness, orProperty. cutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or make
• Closely related to your trade or business2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the an outright sale of timber.
when it became partly or totally worthless.cost of any timber units acquired during
the year and any additions to capital.
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-
3. Figure the number of timber units to take ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt
into account by adding the number of tim- is business related. Bad debts of a corporation
ber units acquired during the year to the (other than an S corporation) are always busi-
number of timber units on hand in the ac- ness bad debts.
10.count at the beginning of the year and then
adding (or subtracting) any correction to Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainly
the estimate of the number of timber units the result of credit sales to customers. Goods
remaining in the account. that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and
services that have been performed, but not yetBusiness4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3). paid for, are recorded in your books as eitherThis is your depletion unit. accounts receivable or notes receivable. After a
Bad Debts reasonable period of time, if you have tried to
Example. You bought a timber tract for collect the amount due, but are unable to do so,
$160,000 and the land was worth as much as the uncollectible part becomes a business bad
the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000. debt.IntroductionBased on an estimated one million board feet Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair
(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your market value (FMV) when received are deducti-You have a bad debt if you cannot collect money
depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ ble only at that value, even though the FMV mayowed to you. A bad debt is either a business bad
1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- be less than the face value. If you purchased andebt or a nonbusiness bad debt. This chapter
tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × account receivable for less than its face value,discusses only business bad debts.
and the receivable subsequently becomes$80). Generally, a business bad debt is one that worthless, the most you are allowed to deduct iscomes from operating your trade or business. the amount you paid to acquire it.When to claim depletion. Claim your deple- You can deduct business bad debts on yourtion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale You can claim a business bad debtbusiness income tax return.or other disposition of the products cut from the deduction only if the amount owed toAll other bad debts are nonbusiness badtimber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of you was previously included in gross
CAUTION
!debts and are deductible only as short-term cap-timber as a sale or exchange (explained below). income. This applies to amounts owed to youInclude allowable depletion for timber products ital losses on Form 8949, Sales and Other Dis- from all sources of taxable income, including
not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as a positions of Capital Assets. For more sales, services, rents, and interest.
cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod- information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-
ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis for Accrual method. If you use the accruallication 550.
determining gain or loss in the tax year you sell method of accounting, you generally report in-
the timber products. come as you earn it. You can only claim a badTopics
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifThis chapter discusses:Example. The facts are the same as in the you have previously included the uncollectible
previous example except that you sold only half amount in income.• Definition of business bad debtof the timber products in the cutting year. You If you qualify, you can use the nonac-
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion • When a debt becomes worthless crual-experience method of accounting dis-
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000 cussed later. Under this method, you do not• How to claim a business bad debtdepletion to your closing inventory of timber have to accrue income that, based on your ex-
products. • Recovery of a bad debt perience, you do not expect to collect.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cash method. If you use the cash method paid that is attributable to the insolvent partner's evidence of the worthlessness of at least a part
of accounting, you generally report income share. of an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
when you receive payment. You cannot claim a Property received for debt. If you receiveBusiness loan guarantee. If you guarantee abad debt deduction for amounts owed to you property in partial settlement of a debt, reducedebt that subsequently becomes worthless, thebecause you never included those amounts in the debt by the property's fair market valuedebt can qualify as a business bad debt if all theincome. For example, a cash basis architect (FMV), which becomes the property's basis.following requirements are met.cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails You can deduct the remaining debt as a badto pay the bill because the architect's fee was • You made the guarantee in the course of debt if and when it becomes worthless.never included in income. your trade or business. If you later sell the property for more than its
basis, any gain on the sale is due to the appreci-• You have a legal duty to pay the debt.Debts from a former business. If you sell
ation of the property. It is not a recovery of a badyour business but retain its receivables, these • You made the guarantee before the debt debt. For information on the sale of an asset,debts are business debts because they arose became worthless. You meet this require- see Publication 544.out of your trade or business. If any of these ment if you reasonably expected youreceivables subsequently become worthless, would not have to pay the debt without fullthe loss is still a business bad debt. reimbursement from the borrower.
Debt acquired from a decedent. The char- • You received reasonable consideration for How To Claim aacter of a loss from debts of a business acquired making the guarantee. You meet this re-from a decedent is determined in the same way quirement if you made the guarantee in Business Bad Debtas debts acquired on the purchase of a busi- accord with normal business practice orness. The executor of the decedent's estate There are two methods to claim a business badfor a good faith business purpose.treats any loss from the debts as a business bad debt.debt if the debts were closely related to the
Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne • The specific charge-off method.decedent's trade or business when they became
Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of aworthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts • The nonaccrual-experience method.$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-becomes a nonbusiness bad debt for the dece-
let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne's largest Generally, you must use the specific charge-offdent's estate.
clients. Elegant Fashions later defaulted on the method. However, you may use the nonac-Liquidation. If you liquidate your business loan. As a result, Ms. Zayne paid the remaining crual-experience method if you meet the re-and some of the accounts receivable that you balance of the loan in full to the bank. quirements discussed later underretain become worthless, they become business She can claim a business bad debt deduc- Nonaccrual-Experience Method.bad debts. tion only for the amount she paid, since her
guarantee was made in the course of her trade Specific Charge-Off MethodTypes of Business Bad or business for a good faith business purpose.
She was motivated by the desire to retain one of If you use the specific charge-off method, youDebts
her better clients and keep a sales outlet. can deduct specific business bad debts that
Business bad debts may result from the follow- become either partly or totally worthless duringDeductible in the year paid. If you make aing. the tax year. However, with respect to partlypayment on a loan you guaranteed, you can worthless bad debts, your deduction is limited todeduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsLoans to clients and suppliers. If you loan the amount you charged off on your books dur-against the borrower.money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib- ing the year.utor for a business reason and you are unable to Rights against a borrower. When youcollect the loan after attempting to do so, you Partly worthless debts. You can deduct spe-make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youhave a business bad debt. cific bad debts that become partly uncollectiblemay have the right to take the place of the during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limitedlender. The debt is then owed to you. If you haveDebts owed by political parties. If a political to the amount you charge off on your booksthis right, or some other right to demand pay-party (or other organization that accepts contri- during the year. You do not have to charge offment from the borrower, you cannot claim a badbutions or spends money to influence elections) and deduct your partly worthless debts annually.debt deduction until these rights become partlyowes you money and the debt becomes worth- You can delay the charge off until a later year.or totally worthless.less, you can claim a bad debt deduction only if However, you cannot deduct any part of a debtall of the following requirements are met. Joint debtor. If two or more debtors jointly after the year it becomes totally worthless.
owe you money, your inability to collect from one1. You use the accrual method of accounting. Significantly modified debt. An exceptiondoes not enable you to deduct a proportionate to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has2. The debt arose from the sale of goods or amount as a bad debt. been significantly modified and on which theservices in the ordinary course of your Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or holder recognized gain. For more information,trade or business. pledged property is sold for less than the debt, see Regulations section 1.166-3(a)(3).
3. More than 30% of your receivables ac- the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a Deduction disallowed. Generally, you cancrued in the year of the sale were from bad debt. claim a partial bad debt deduction only in thesales to political parties.
year you make the charge-off on your books. If,
4. You made substantial and continuing ef- under audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc-
forts to collect on the debt. tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in aWhen a Debt Becomes later tax year, you can deduct the amount you
Loan or capital contribution. You cannot charged off in that year plus the disallowedWorthlessclaim a bad debt deduction for a loan you made amount charged off in the earlier year. The
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir- charge-off in the earlier year, unless reversed onA debt becomes worthless when there is nocumstances, the loan is actually a contribution to your books, fulfills the charge-off requirement forlonger any chance the amount owed will be paid.capital. the later year.This may occur when the debt is due or prior to
Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi- that date. Totally worthless debts. If a debt becomes
ness partnership breaks up and one of your To demonstrate worthlessness, you must totally worthless in the current tax year, you can
former partners becomes insolvent, you may only show that you have taken reasonable steps deduct the entire amount, less any amount de-
have to pay more than your pro rata share of the to collect the debt but were unable to do so. It is ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was
partnership's debts. If you pay any part of the not necessary to go to court if you can show that only partly worthless.
insolvent partner's share of the debts, you can a judgment from the court would be uncollecti- You do not have to make an actual
claim a bad debt deduction for the amount you ble. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 39

Page 40 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction for a totally worthless debt. However, Service related income. You can use the
you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRS nonaccrual-experience method only for
later rules the debt is only partly worthless, you amounts earned by performing services. You 11.will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in cannot use this method for amounts owed to you
that tax year because a deduction of a partly from activities such as lending money, selling
worthless bad debt is limited to the amount actu- goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights to
ally charged off. See Partly worthless debts, receive payment. Other Expensesearlier.
Gross receipts test. To find out if you meetFiling a claim for refund. If you did not deduct the $5 million gross receipts test for all priora bad debt on your original return for the year it What's Newyears, you must figure the average annual grossbecame worthless, you can file a claim for a
receipts for each prior year. If your averagecredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth- Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-annual gross receipts for any year exceeds $5less, you must file the claim by the later of the age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,million, you cannot use the non-accural experi-following dates. pickup, or panel truck in 2011 is 51 cents a mileence method. for business miles driven before July 1, 2011,• 7 years from the date your original return The average annual gross receipts for any and 55.5 cents a mile for business miles drivenwas due (not including extensions). year is the average of gross receipts from the after June 30, 2011. For more information see
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. year in question and the 2 previous years. For Car and truck expenses  under Miscellaneous
example, if you were figuring the average an- Expenses.
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, nual gross receipts for 2011, you would average
you must file the claim by the later of the follow- your gross receipts for 2009, 2010, and 2011.
ing dates.
Interest or penalty charged. Generally, you Introduction• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
cannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodnal return. This chapter covers business expenses thatfor amounts due on which you charge interest or may not have been explained to you, as a busi-• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-You may have longer to file the claim if you were discount offered for early payment as the charg- tion.unable to manage your financial affairs due to a ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
physical or mental impairment. Such an impair- apply. Topicsment requires proof of existence. This chapter discusses:• You otherwise accrue the full amount due
For details and more information about filing a as gross income at the time you provide
claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol- • Travel, meals, and entertainmentthe services.
lowing forms to file a claim. For more informa- • Bribes and kickbacks• You treat the discount allowed for earlytion, see the instructions for the applicable form.
payment as an adjustment to gross in- • Charitable contributions
Table 10-1. Forms Used To File a come in the year of payment. • Education expensesClaim
• Lobbying expensesChange in accounting method. See Form
IF you filed as THEN file... 3115, Application for Change in Accounting • Penalties and fines
a... Method, and the Instructions for Form 3115 for • Repayments (claim of right)information on obtaining consent to change to aSole proprietor or  Form 1040X • Other miscellaneous expensesnonaccrual-experience method (other than onefarmer
of the safe harbor methods) or to change from
Corporation  Form 1120X one method to another. Useful Items
S corporation  Form 1120S You may want to see:
(check box H(4))
PublicationPartnership  Form 1065 Recovery of a Bad(check box G(5)) ❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe
BenefitsDebt
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarIf you claim a deduction for a bad debt on yourNonaccrual-Experience Expensesincome tax return and later recover (collect) allMethod ❏ 526 Charitable Contributionsor part of it, you may have to include all or part of
the recovery in gross income. The amount youIf you use an accrual method of accounting and ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsinclude is limited to the amount you actuallyqualify under the rules explained in this section,
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofdeducted. However, you can exclude theyou can use the nonaccrual-experience method
Assetsfor bad debts. Under this method, you do not amount deducted that did not reduce your tax.
accrue service related income you expect to be Report the recovery as ªOther incomeº on the ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
uncollectible. Because the expected uncollecti- appropriate business form or schedule. ❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesble amounts are not included in income, these See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more
amounts are not later deducted from income. information. See chapter 12 for information about gettingGenerally, you can use the nonac- publications and forms.Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If acrual-experience method for accounts receiva- bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryoverble for services you performed only if:
that has not expired before the beginning of the
• The services are provided in the fields of tax year in which the recovery takes place, you
accounting, actuarial science, architecture, treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.
consulting, engineering, health, law, or the A bad debt deduction that contributes to a NOLperforming arts, or helps lower taxes in the year to which you carry
the NOL. See Publication 536 for more informa-• You meet the $5 million gross receipts test
tion about NOLs.for all prior years.
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 11-1. Reporting Reimbursements
Reimbursement of
IF the type of reimbursement (or otherTravel, Meals, and
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2
Entertainment An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.The following discussion explains how to handle
Adequate accounting made and excessany reimbursements or allowances you may
returnedprovide to your employees under a reimburse-
ment or allowance arrangement for travel, Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.meals, and entertainment expenses. If you are Adequate accounting and return of excess
self-employed and report your income and ex- both required but excess not returned
penses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040),
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.see Publication 463.
federal rate:To be deductible for tax purposes, expenses Adequate accounting made and excessincurred for travel, meals, and entertainment returnedmust be ordinary and necessary expenses in-
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. Thecurred while carrying on your trade or business.
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyGenerally, you also must show that entertain-
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.ment expenses (including meals) are directly
both required but excess not returnedrelated to, or associated with, the conduct of
your trade or business. For more information on Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
travel, meals, and entertainment, including de- federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
ductibility, see Publication 463. Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.
rate only and excess not returned
Reimbursements A nonaccountable plan with:
A ªreimbursement or allowance arrangementº Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
provides for payment of advances, reimburse- excess, or both, not required by plan
ments, and allowances for travel, meals, and No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.entertainment expenses incurred by your em-
ployees during the ordinary course of business.
If the expenses are substantiated, you can de-
2. Adequately account to you for these ex- Excess reimbursement or allowance. Anduct the allowable amount on your tax return. excess reimbursement or allowance is anypenses within a reasonable period of time,Because of differences between accounting amount you pay to an employee that is moreandmethods and tax law, the amount you can de- than the business-related expenses for whichduct for tax purposes may not be the same as 3. Return any excess reimbursement or al- the employee adequately accounted. The em-the amount you deduct on your business books lowance within a reasonable period of ployee must return any excess reimbursementand records. For example, you can deduct time. or other expense allowance to you within a rea-100% of the cost of meals on your business sonable period of time.An arrangement under which you advancebooks and records. However, only 50% of these
money to employees is treated as meeting (3)costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction. Reasonable period of time. A reasonableabove only if the following requirements are alsoHow you deduct a business expense under a period of time depends on the facts and circum-met.reimbursement or allowance arrangement de- stances. Generally, actions that take place
pends on whether you have: • The advance is reasonably calculated not within the times specified in the following list will
be treated as taking place within a reasonableto exceed the amount of anticipated ex-• An accountable plan, or period of time.penses.
• A nonaccountable plan.
• You make the advance within a reasona- 1. You give an advance within 30 days of theIf you reimburse these expenses under an ac- ble period of time of your employee paying time the employee pays or incurs the ex-countable plan, deduct them as travel, meals, or or incurring the expense. pense.entertainment expenses.
2. Your employees adequately account forIf any expenses reimbursed under this ar- If you reimburse these expenses under a their expenses within 60 days after the ex-rangement are not substantiated, or an excessnonaccountable plan, report the reimburse- penses were paid or incurred.reimbursement is not returned within a reasona-ments as wages on Form W-2, Wage and Tax
3. Your employees return any excess reim-ble period of time by an employee, you cannotStatement, and deduct them as wages on the
bursement within 120 days after the ex-treat these expenses as reimbursed under anappropriate line of your tax return. If you make a
penses were paid or incurred.accountable plan. Instead, treat the reimbursedsingle payment to your employees and it in-
cludes both wages and an expense reimburse- expenses as paid under a nonaccountable plan, 4. You give a periodic statement (at least
ment, you must specify the amount of the discussed later. quarterly) to your employees that asks
reimbursement and report it accordingly. See them to either return or adequately ac-
Table 11-1, Reporting Reimbursements. Adequate accounting. Your employees must count for outstanding advances and they
adequately account to you for their travel, comply within 120 days of the date of the
statement.meals, and entertainment expenses. They must
Accountable Plans give you documentary evidence of their travel,
mileage, and other employee business ex- How to deduct. You can claim a deduction forAn accountable plan requires your employees to penses. This evidence should include items travel, meals, and entertainment expenses ifmeet all of the following requirements. Each such as receipts, along with either a statement you reimburse your employees for these ex-employee must: of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or penses under an accountable plan. Generally,
similar record in which the employee entered1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses the amount you can deduct for meals and enter-
each expense at or near the time the expensewhile performing services as your em- tainment is subject to a 50% limit, discussed
was incurred.ployee, later. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
single member limited liability company, deduct Regular federal per diem rate. The regular than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, that
the travel reimbursement on line 24a and the federal per diem rate is the highest amount the allowance is not included as part of the em-
deductible part of the meals and entertainment federal government will pay to its employees ployee's pay in box 1 of the employee's Form
reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C (Form while away from home on travel. It has two W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses
1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). components: (including meals that may be subject to the 50%
limit, discussed later). See How to deduct underIf you are filing an income tax return for a 1. Lodging expense, and Accountable Plans, earlier.corporation, include the reimbursement on the
Other deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corpo- 2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE). Allowance more than the federal rate. Ifration Income Tax Return. If you are filing any your employee's allowance is more than theThe rates are different for different locations.other business income tax return, such as a appropriate federal rate, you must report thePublication 1542 lists the rates in the continentalpartnership or S corporation return, deduct the allowance as two separate items.United States.reimbursement on the appropriate line of the Include the allowance amount up to the fed-return as provided in the instructions for that Standard meal allowance. The federal rate eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee'sreturn. for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as
standard meal allowance. You can pay only an explained above). This part of the allowance is
M & IE allowance to employees who travel away treated as reimbursed under an accountable
Per Diem and Car Allowances from home if: plan.
Include the amount that is more than the• You pay the employee for actual expensesYou can reimburse your employees under an federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if theyfor lodging based on receipts submitted toaccountable plan based on travel days, miles, or apply) of the employee's Form W-2. Deduct it asyou,some other fixed allowance. In these cases, wages subject to income tax withholding, socialyour employee is considered to have accounted • You provide for the lodging, security, Medicare, and federal unemploymentto you for the amount of the expense that does taxes. This part of the allowance is treated as• You pay for the actual expense of thenot exceed the rates established by the federal reimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex-lodging directly to the provider,government. Your employee must actually sub- plained later under Nonaccountable Plans.stantiate to you the other elements of the ex- • You do not have a reasonable belief that
pense, such as time, place, and business lodging expenses were incurred by the
purpose. employee, or Meals and Entertainment
• The allowance is computed on a basisFederal rate. The federal rate can be figured Under an accountable plan, you can generallysimilar to that used in computing the em-using any one of the following methods. deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductibleployee's wages (that is, number of hours business-related meal and entertainment ex-worked or miles traveled).1. For per diem amounts: penses you reimburse your employees. The de-
duction limit applies even if you reimburse thema. The regular federal per diem rate. Internet access. Per diem rates are avail- for 100% of the expenses.able on the Internet. You can access per diemb. The standard meal allowance. rates at www.gsa.gov. Application of the 50% limit. The 50% de-c. The high-low rate. duction limit applies to reimbursements youHigh-low method. This is a simplified
make to your employees for expenses they incurmethod of computing the federal per diem rate2. For car expenses: for meals while traveling away from home onfor travel within the continental United States. It
business and for entertaining business custom-eliminates the need to keep a current list of thea. The standard mileage rate. ers at your place of business, a restaurant, orper diem rate for each city.b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). another location. It applies to expenses incurredUnder the high-low method, the per diem
at a business convention or reception, businessamount for travel during January through Sep-
meeting, or business luncheon at a club. Thetember of 2011 is $233 ($65 for M&IE) for cer-Car allowance. Your employee is considered deduction limit may also apply to meals youtain high-cost locations. All other areas have ato have accounted to you for car expenses that furnish on your premises to your employees.per diem amount of $160 ($52 for M&IE). Thedo not exceed the standard mileage rate. For high-cost locations eligible for the higher per Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating2011, the standard mileage rate is 51 cents a diem amount under the high-low method are to a meal or entertainment activity you reim-mile for business miles driven before July 1, listed in Publication 1542. burse to your employee under an accountable2011, and 55.5 cents a mile for business miles Effective October 1, 2011, the per diem rate plan are included in the amount subject to thedriven after June 30, 2011. for high-cost locations increased to $242 ($65 50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-You can choose to reimburse your employ- for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in- penses, such as cover charges for admission toees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al- creased to $163 ($52 for M&IE). For October, a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinnerlowance. This is an allowance that includes a November, and December 2011, you can either or cocktail party, or the amount you pay forcombination of payments covering fixed and va- continue to use the rates described in the pre- parking at a sports arena, are all subject to theriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to ceding paragraph or change to the new rates. 50% limit. However, the cost of transportation tocover your employees' variable operating costs However, you must use the same rates for all and from an otherwise allowable business meal(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover employees reimbursed under the high-low or a business-related entertainment activity isyour employees' fixed costs (such as deprecia- method. For more information about the not subject to the 50% limit.tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a high-low method, see Revenue Procedure
FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure Amount subject to 50% limit. If you provide2011-47, which can be found on the Internet at
2010-51 and Notice 2010-88 in Internal Reve- your employees with a per diem allowance onlywww.irs.gov/irb/2011-42_IRB/ar12.html.  See
nue Bulletin 2010-51. You can read Revenue for meal and incidental expenses, the amountPublication 1542 (available on the Internet at
Procedure 2010-51 and Notice 2010-88 at www. treated as an expense for food and beverages isIRS.gov) for the current per diem rates for all
irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb10-51.pdf. the lesser of the following.locations.
• The per diem allowance.Reporting per diem and car allowances.Per diem allowance. If your employee actu- The following discussion explains how to reportally substantiates to you the other elements (dis- • The federal rate for M & IE.per diem and car allowances. The manner incussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed which you report them depends on how theusing the per diem allowance, how you report If you provide your employees with a per diemallowance compares to the federal rate. Seeand deduct the allowance depends on whether allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-Table 11-1.the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses dental expenses, you must treat an amount
or for meal expenses only and whether the al- Allowance less than or equal to the federal equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of
lowance is more than the federal rate. rate. If your allowance for the employee is less travel as an expense for food and beverages. If
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the per diem allowance you provide is less than include the expenses in gross income You can usually deduct as a business ex-
the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, pense the cost of institutional or goodwill adver-as compensation for services or as a
you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as tising to keep your name before the public if itprize or award, and
the amount for food and beverages. relates to business you reasonably expect tob. You include that amount on a Form gain in the future. For example, the cost of ad-Meal expenses when subject to ªhours of 1099 issued to the recipient, if a Form vertising that encourages people to contribute toserviceº limits. You can deduct 80% of the 1099 is required. the Red Cross, to buy U.S. Savings Bonds, or tocost of reimbursed meals your employees con- participate in similar causes is usually deducti-sume while away from their tax home on busi- ble.Sales of meals or entertainment. You canness during, or incident to, any period subject to
deduct the cost of meals or entertainment (in-the Department of Transportation's ªhours of Anticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilitiescluding the use of facilities) you sell to the public.serviceº limits. or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-For example, if you run a nightclub, your ex-See Publication 463 for a detailed discussion ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearpense for the entertainment you furnish to yourof individuals subject to the Department of TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.customers, such as a floor show, is a businessTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. From experience, you know you will have ex-expense that is fully deductible. The 50% limit penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forDe minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The does not apply to this expense. these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the50% limit does not apply to an expense for food
$15,000 this year by charging expenses to aor beverage that is excluded from the gross Providing meals or entertainment to general reserve or liability account. You can deduct yourincome of an employee because it is a de public to promote goodwill. You can deduct expenses only when you actually pay or accrueminimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for the cost of providing meals, entertainment, or them, depending on your accounting method.additional information on de minimis fringe ben- recreational facilities to the general public as a
efits. means of advertising or promoting goodwill in Bribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay-the community. The 50% limit does not apply toCompany cafeteria or executive dining ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal
this expense.room. The cost of food and beverages you matter. Such activity could result in criminal
provide primarily to your employees on your prosecution. Any payments that appear to haveDirector, stockholder, or employee meet-business premises is deductible. This includes been made, either directly or indirectly, to anings. You can deduct entertainment expensesthe cost of maintaining the facilities for providing official or employee of any government or andirectly related to business meetings of yourthe food and beverages. These expenses are agency or instrumentality of any government areemployees, partners, stockholders, agents, orsubject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola-directors. You can provide some minor socialde minimis fringe benefit, as just discussed, or tion of the law.activities, but the main purpose of the meetingunless they are compensation to your employ- Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-must be your company's business. These ex-ees (explained later). son in violation of any federal or state law (butpenses are subject to the 50% limit. only if that state law is generally enforced, de-Employee activities. The expense of provid- fined below) that provides for a criminal penaltying recreational, social, or similar activities (in- Trade association meetings. You can de- or for the loss of a license or privilege to engagecluding the use of a facility) for your employees duct expenses directly related to and necessary in a trade or business are also not allowed as ais deductible and is not subject to the 50% limit. for attending business meetings or conventions deduction for tax purposes.The benefit must be primarily for your employ- of certain tax-exempt organizations. These or-
ees who are not highly compensated. Meaning of ªgenerally enforced.º A stateganizations include business leagues, cham-
For this purpose, a highly compensated em- law is considered generally enforced unless it isbers of commerce, real estate boards, and trade
ployee is an employee who meets either of the never enforced or enforced only for infamousand professional associations.
following requirements. persons or persons whose violations are ex-
traordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi- Nonaccountable Plans generally enforced unless proper reporting of aness during the year or the preceding year. violation of the law results in enforcement onlyAn employee is treated as owning any in- A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that under unusual circumstances.terest owned by his or her brother, sister, does not meet the requirements for an account-
Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re-spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend- able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,
ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com-ants. under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
mon kickback situation occurs when money orwages on Form W-2. The payments are subject2. Received more than $110,000 in pay for property is given to someone as payment forto income tax withholding, social security, Medi-the preceding year. You can choose to in- influencing a third party to purchase from, usecare, and federal unemployment taxes. You canclude only employees who were also in the the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-deduct the reimbursement as compensation ortop 20% of employees when ranked by son who pays the kickback. In many cases, thewages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-pay for the preceding year. person whose business is being sought or en-ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct
joyed by the person who pays the kickback is notFor example, the expenses for food, bever- the allowable amount as compensation or
aware of the payment.ages, and entertainment for a company-wide wages on the appropriate line of your income tax
For example, the Yard Corporation is in thepicnic are not subject to the 50% limit. return, as provided in its instructions.
business of repairing ships. It returns 10% of theMeals or entertainment treated as compen- repair bills as kickbacks to the captains and chiefsation. The 50% limit does not apply to either officers of the vessels it repairs. Although thisof the following. practice is considered an ordinary and neces-Miscellaneous sary expense of getting business, it is clearly a1. Expenses for meals or entertainment that violation of a state law that is generally enforced.you treat as: Expenses These expenditures are not deductible for tax
purposes, whether or not the owners of the ship-a. Compensation to an employee who was In addition to travel, meal, and entertainment yard are subsequently prosecuted.the recipient of the meals or entertain- expenses, there are other expenses you can
ment, and deduct. Form 1099-MISC. It does not matter
whether any kickbacks paid during the tax yearb. Wages subject to withholding of federal Advertising expenses. You generally can are deductible on your income tax return in re-income tax. deduct reasonable advertising expenses that gards to information reporting. See Form
are directly related to your business activities. 1099-MISC for more information.2. Expenses for meals or entertainment if:
Generally, you cannot deduct amounts paid to
influence legislation (i.e., lobbying). See Lobby-a. A recipient of the meals or entertain- Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat-
ing expenses, later.ment who is not your employee has to ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are deductible. For more information on how to of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola- you to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
figure your deduction, see Publication 463. penses) as a business expense, rather than as ations. You must include this compensation in
medical expense.your income. However, you may be able to take
Charitable contributions. Cash payments to a special deduction. The deduction applies only You are disabled if you have either of the
an organization, charitable or otherwise, may be to amounts recovered for actual economic in- following.
deductible as business expenses if the pay- jury, not any additional amount. The deduction is • A physical or mental disability (for exam-ments are not charitable contributions or gifts the smaller of the following. ple, blindness or deafness) that function-and are directly related to your business. If the • The amount you received or accrued for ally limits your being employed.payments are charitable contributions or gifts, damages in the tax year reduced by theyou cannot deduct them as business expenses. • A physical or mental impairment that sub-amount you paid or incurred in the year toHowever, corporations (other than S corpora- stantially limits one or more of your majorrecover that amount.tions) can deduct charitable contributions on life activities.
their income tax returns, subject to limitations. • Your losses from the injury you have not
See the Instructions for Form 1120  for more deducted. The expense qualifies as a business expense
information. Sole proprietors, partners in a part- if all the following apply.
nership, or shareholders in an S corporation Demolition expenses or losses. Amounts • Your work clearly requires the expense formay be able to deduct charitable contributions paid or incurred to demolish a structure are not you to satisfactorily perform that work.made by their business on Schedule A (Form deductible. These amounts are added to the1040). • The goods or services purchased arebasis of the land where the demolished structure clearly not needed or used, other than in-was located. Any loss for the remaining un-Example. You paid $15 to a local church for cidentally, in your personal activities.depreciated basis of a demolished structurea half-page ad in a program for a concert it is
would not be recognized until the property is • Their treatment is not specifically providedsponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-
disposed of. for under other tax law provisions.courage readers to buy your products. Your pay-
ment is not a charitable contribution. You can Education expenses. Ordinary and neces-deduct it as an advertising expense. Example. You are blind. You must use asary expenses paid for the cost of the education reader to do your work, both at and away fromand training of your employees are deductible.Example. You made a $100,000 donation your place of work. The reader's services areSee Education Expenses in chapter 2.to a committee organized by the local Chamber only for your work. You can deduct your ex-You can also deduct the cost of your ownof Commerce to bring a convention to your city, penses for the reader as a business expense.education (including certain related travel) re-intended to increase business activity, including
lated to your trade or business. You must beyours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu- Internet-related expenses. Generally, you
able to show the education maintains or im-tion. You can deduct it as a business expense. can deduct internet-related expenses including
proves skills required in your trade or business,See Publication 526 for a discussion of domain registrations fees and webmaster con-
or that it is required by law or regulations, fordonated inventory, including capital gain prop- sulting costs. If you are starting a business you
keeping your license to practice, status, or job.erty. may have to amortize these expenses as
For example, an attorney can deduct the cost of start-up costs. For more information about am-
attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)Club dues and membership fees. Generally, ortizing start-up and organizational costs, see
classes that are required by the state bar associ-you cannot deduct amounts paid or incurred for chapter 8.
ation to maintain his or her license to practicemembership in any club organized for business,
pleasure, recreation, or any other social pur- law. Interview expense allowances. Reimburse-
pose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath- Education expenses you incur to meet the ments you make to job candidates for transpor-
letic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline tation or other expenses related to interviews forminimum requirements of your present trade or
clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals possible employment are not wages. You canbusiness, or those that qualify you for a new
under circumstances generally considered to be deduct the reimbursements as a business ex-trade or business, are not deductible. This is true
conducive to business discussions. pense. However, expenses for food, beverages,even if the education maintains or improves
and entertainment are subject to the 50% limitskills presently required in your business. ForException. The following organizations are discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain-more information on education expenses, seenot treated as clubs organized for business, ment.Publication 970.pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un-
less one of the main purposes is to conduct Legal and professional fees. Fees chargedFranchise, trademark, trade name. If youentertainment activities for members or their by accountants and attorneys that are ordinarybuy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youguests or to provide members or their guests and necessary expenses directly related to op-can deduct the amount you pay or incur as awith access to entertainment facilities. erating your business are deductible as busi-business expense only if your payments are part
• Boards of trade. ness expenses. However, usually legal fees youof a series of payments that are:
pay to acquire business assets are not deducti-• Business leagues. 1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi- ble. These costs are added to the basis of the
tion of the item,• Chambers of commerce. property.
Fees that include payments for work of a2. Payable at least annually for the entire• Civic or public service organizations. personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-term of the transfer agreement, and
• Professional organizations such as bar as- ages arising from a personal injury) are not al-3. Substantially equal in amount (or payablesociations and medical associations. lowed as a business deduction on Schedule C orunder a fixed formula). C-EZ. If the invoice includes both business and• Real estate boards.
personal charges, compute the business portionWhen determining the term of the transfer
• Trade associations. as follows: multiply the total amount of the bill byagreement, include all renewal options and any
a fraction, the numerator of which is the amountother period for which you and the transferrer
attributable to business matters, the denomina-reasonably expect the agreement to be re-Credit card convenience fees. Credit card
tor of which is the total amount paid. The result isnewed.companies charge a fee to businesses who ac-
the portion of the invoice attributable to businessA franchise includes an agreement that givescept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred
expenses. The portion attributable to personalone of the parties to the agreement the right toby the business can be deducted as a business
matters is the difference between the totaldistribute, sell, or provide goods, services, orexpense.
amount and the business portion (computedfacilities within a specified area.
above).Damages recovered. Special rules apply to
Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis-compensation you receive for damages sus- Legal fees relating to personal tax advice
abled, you can deduct expenses necessary fortained as a result of patent infringement, breach may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040),
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
if you itemize deductions. However, the deduc- 3. Any officer or employee of the White are now required to pay an additional amount for
House Office of the Executive Office of thetion is subject to the 2% limitation on miscellane- each day that completion is delayed beyond the
President and the two most senior levelous itemized deductions. See Publication 529, completion date stipulated in the contract.
officers of each of the other agencies inMiscellaneous Deductions. These additional costs are deductible business
the Executive Office. expenses.Tax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a
On the other hand, penalties or fines paid to4. Any individual who:tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare
any government agency or instrumentality be-that part of your tax return relating to your busi-
a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the cause of a violation of any law are not deducti-ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched- Executive Schedule under section 5312 ble. These fines or penalties include theule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost of title 5, United States Code, following amounts.may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
you itemize deductions. b. Has been designated by the President • Paid because of a conviction for a crime or
You can also claim a business deduction for as having Cabinet-level status, or after a plea of guilty or no contest in a
amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted criminal proceeding.c. Is an immediate deputy of an individualtax deficiencies for your business operated as a listed in item (a) or (b). • Paid as a penalty imposed by federal,sole proprietor. state, or local law in a civil action, includ-
ing certain additions to tax and additionalLicenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and Exceptions to denial of deduction. The amounts and assessable penalties im-regulatory fees for your trade or business paid general denial of the deduction does not apply to posed by the Internal Revenue Code.annually to state or local governments generally the following.
are deductible. Some licenses and fees may • Paid in settlement of actual or possible• Expenses of appearing before, or commu-have to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more liability for a fine or penalty, whether civilnicating with, any committee or member ofinformation. or criminal.any local council or similar governing body
concerning its legislation (local legislation) • Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-Lobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex- if the legislation is of direct interest to you ceeding that could result in a fine or pen-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses or to you and an organization of which you alty.include amounts paid or incurred for any of the are a member. An Indian tribal govern-following activities. ment is treated as a local council or similar Examples of nondeductible penalties and
• Influencing legislation. governing body. fines include the following.
• Participating in or intervening in any politi- • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg- • Fines for violating city housing codes.
cal campaign for, or against, any candi- islation and communicating directly with a
• Fines paid by truckers for violating statedate for public office. covered executive branch official if those
maximum highway weight laws.expenses for the tax year do not exceed• Attempting to influence the general public, $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses). • Fines for violating air quality laws.or segments of the public, about elections,
legislative matters, or referendums. • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged • Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-
in the trade or business of lobbying (pro- garding mining safety standards and dis-• Communicating directly with covered ex- fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another charges into navigable waters.ecutive branch officials (defined later) in person (but does apply to payments by theany attempt to influence the official actions other person to the lobbyist for lobbying A fine or penalty does not include any of theor positions of those officials. activities). following.
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-
• Legal fees and related expenses to defenddinating any of the preceding activities. Moving machinery. Generally, the cost of yourself in a prosecution or civil action for
moving machinery from one city to another is a a violation of the law imposing the fine orYour expenses for influencing legislation and deductible expense. So is the cost of moving civil penalty.communicating directly with a covered execu- machinery from one plant to another, or fromtive branch official include a portion of your labor • Court costs or stenographic and printingone part of your plant to another. You can de-costs and general and administrative costs of charges.duct the cost of installing the machinery in theyour business. For information on making this new location. However, you must capitalize the • Compensatory damages paid to a govern-allocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula- costs of installing or moving newly purchased ment.tions. machinery.
You cannot claim a charitable or business
expense deduction for amounts paid to an or- Outplacement services. The costs of out- Political contributions. Contributions or gifts
ganization if both of the following apply. placement services you provide to your employ- paid to political parties or candidates are not
ees to help them find new employment, such as deductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-• The organization conducts lobbying activi- career counseling, rÂesumÂe assistance, skills as- curred to take part in any political campaign of aties on matters of direct financial interest sessment, etc. are deductible. candidate for public office are not deductible.to your business. The costs of outplacement services may Indirect political contributions. You can-• A principal purpose of your contribution is cover more than one deduction category. For not deduct indirect political contributions andto avoid the rules discussed earlier that example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost costs of taking part in political activities as busi-prohibit a business deduction for lobbying of telephone calls made under this service and ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-expenses. deduct as rental expense the cost of renting penses include the following.machinery and equipment for this service.
If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec- For information on whether the value of out- • Advertising in a convention program of a
tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a placement services is includable in your employ- political party, or in any other publication if
notice on the part of dues that is allocable to ees' income, see Publication 15-B. any of the proceeds from the publication
nondeductible lobbying and political expenses, are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for lateyou cannot deduct that part of the dues. cal party or candidate.performance or nonperformance of a contract
Covered executive branch official. For • Admission to a dinner or program (includ-are generally deductible. For instance, you own
purposes of this discussion, a covered executive ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmand operate a construction company. Under a
branch official is any of the following. presentations, parties, and sportingcontract, you are to finish construction of a build-
events) if any of the proceeds from theing by a certain date. Due to construction delays,1. The President. function are for, or intended for, the use ofthe building is not completed and ready for occu-
2. The Vice President. a political party or candidate.pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 45

Page 46 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, Method 2. Figure your tax for 2011 claiming the deduction or credit in the tax year in which
parade, concert, or similar event if identi- a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these the obligation for the repayment accrues.
fied with a political party or candidate. steps.
Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional,
1. Figure your tax for 2011 without deducting technical, and trade journals that deal with yourRepairs. The cost of repairing or improving the repaid amount. business field are deductible.property used in your trade or business is either
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yeara deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte- Supplies and materials. Unless you have de-without including in income the amountnance that keeps your property in a normal effi- ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generallyyou repaid in 2011.cient operating condition, but that does not can deduct the cost of materials and supplies
materially increase the value or substantially actually consumed and used during the tax year.3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
prolong the useful life of the property, is deducti- If you keep incidental materials and supplieson your return for the earlier year. This is
ble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, the on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden-the amount of your credit.
cost must be capitalized and depreciated. See tal materials and supplies you bought during the4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forForm 4562 and its instructions for how to com- tax year if all the following requirements are met.2011 figured without the deduction (steppute and claim the depreciation deduction.
• You do not keep a record of when they are1).The cost of repairs includes the costs of used.labor, supplies, and certain other items. The If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
value of your own labor is not deductible. Exam- • You do not take an inventory of theamount repaid as discussed earlier under Type
ples of repairs include: amount on hand at the beginning and endof deduction.
of the tax year.If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the• Reconditioning floors (but not replace-
credit on line 71 of Form 1040, and write ªI.R.C.ment), • This method does not distort your income.1341º next to line 71.
• Repainting the interior and exterior walls You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-of a building, Example. For 2010, you filed a return and sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-reported your income on the cash method. In• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters, mally use them within a year. However, if the2011, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2010and usefulness of these items extends substantiallygross income under a claim of right. Your filing beyond the year they are placed in service, you• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- status in 2011 and 2010 is single. Your income generally must recover their costs through de-ment of fixtures). and tax for both years are as follows: preciation. For more information regarding de-
preciation see Publication 946, How To2010 2010 Repayments. If you had to repay an amount Depreciate Property.With Income Without Incomeyou included in your income in an earlier year, Taxableyou may be able to deduct the amount repaid for Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights,Income $15,000 $10,000the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount power, telephone service, and water and sewer-
Tax $ 1,835 $ 1,085you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able age are deductible. However, any part due to
to take a credit against your tax for the year in personal use is not deductible.
2011 2011 which you repaid it. Telephone. You cannot deduct the cost ofWithout Deduction With DeductionType of deduction. The type of deduction basic local telephone service (including anyTaxable
you are allowed in the year of repayment de- taxes) for the first telephone line you have inIncome $49,950 $44,950
pends on the type of income you included in the your home, even if you have an office in yourTax  $8,619  $7,369earlier year. For instance, if you repay an home. However, charges for business
amount you previously reported as a capital long-distance phone calls on that line, as well asYour tax under Method 1 is $7,369. Your tax
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on the cost of a second line into your home usedunder Method 2 is $7,869, figured as follows:
Form 8949. If you reported it as exclusively for business, are deductible busi-
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi- ness expenses.Tax previously determined for 2010 $ 1,835
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Less: Tax as refigured ......... . − 1,085
C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). Decrease in 2010 tax $ 750
Regular tax liability for 2011 ...... . $8,619If you reported the amount as wages, unem-
Less: Decrease in 2010 tax ...... . − 750ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness
Refigured tax for 2011 $ 7,869ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Form
1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deduction Because you pay less tax under Method 1, youthat is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if 12.should take a deduction for the repayment inthe repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1 2011.(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule
A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de- Repayment does not apply. This discus-
How To Get Taxduction that is not subject to the 2% limitation. sion does not apply to the following.
Repayment Ð $3,000 or less. If the • Deductions for bad debts.
Helpamount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it • Deductions from sales to customers, suchfrom your income in the year you repaid it. as returns and allowances, and similar You can get help with unresolved tax issues,RepaymentÐover $3,000. If the amount items. order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de- • Deductions for legal and other expenses tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-duct the repayment, as described earlier. How- of contesting the repayment. eral ways. By selecting the method that is bestever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit for you, you will have quick and easy access tofor the year of repayment if you included the Year of deduction (or credit). If you use tax help.income under a ªclaim of right.º This means that the cash method of accounting, you can take theat the time you included the income, it appeared deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayerthat you had an unrestricted right to it. If you year in which you actually make the repayment. Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS.qualify for this choice, figure your tax under both If you use any other accounting method, you can Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer ismethods and use the method that results in less deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only treated fairly, and that you know and understandtax. for the tax year in which it is a proper deduction your rights. We offer free help to guide you
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2011 claiming under your accounting method. For example, if through the often-confusing process of resolving
a deduction for the repaid amount. you use the accrual method, you are entitled to tax problems that you haven't been able to solve
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on your own. Remember, the worst thing you IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income prior-year forms and instructions. You
can do is nothing at all. Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to should receive your order within 10 days.
TAS can help if you can't resolve your prob- help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withlem with the IRS and: seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed your tax questions at 1-800-829-4933.to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their• Your problem is causing financial difficul- • Solving problems. You can gettax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites offer freeties for you, your family, or your business. face-to-face help solving tax problemselectronic filing and all volunteers will let you
• You face (or your business is facing) an know about credits and deductions you may be every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-
immediate threat of adverse action. entitled to claim. To find the nearest VITA or sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call 1-800-906-9887 or plain IRS letters, request adjustments to• You have tried repeatedly to contact the
1-800-829-1040. your account, or help you set up a pay-IRS but no one has responded, or the IRS
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers thehas not responded to you by the date
tance Center for an appointment. To findTax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-promised.
est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or the number, go to 
visit AARP's website at www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theIf you qualify for our help, we'll do everything
www.aarp.org/money/taxaide. phone book under United States Govern-we can to get your problem resolved. You will be
assigned to one advocate who will be with you at ment, Internal Revenue Service.For more information on these programs, go
every turn. We have offices in every state, the to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessDistrict of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Although upper right-hand corner. to TTY/TDD equipment, callTAS is independent within the IRS, our advo- 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toInternet. You can access the IRS web-cates know how to work with the IRS to get your order forms and publications.site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 daysproblems resolved. And our services are always a week to:
free. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS • E-file your return. Find out about commer- ten to pre-recorded messages covering
must abide by in its dealings with you. Our tax cial tax preparation and e-file services various tax topics.
toolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can available free to eligible taxpayers. • Refund information. To check the status ofhelp you understand these rights. • Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go your 2011 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 orIf you think TAS might be able to help you, to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-call your local advocate, whose number is in fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).your phone book and on our website at www.irs. acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-gov/advocate. You can also call our toll-free turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,number at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
return. If you filed Form 8379 with your or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-1-800-829-4059.
return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-TAS also handles large-scale or systemic
filed electronically). Have your 2011 tax turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filedproblems that affect many taxpayers. If you
return available so you can provide your electronically). Have your 2011 tax returnknow of one of these broad issues, please report
social security number, your filing status, available so you can provide your socialit to us through our Systemic Advocacy Manage-
and the exact whole dollar amount of yourment System at www.irs.gov/advocate. security number, your filing status, and the
refund. exact whole dollar amount of your refund.Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). If you check the status of your refund and• Download forms, including talking taxLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde- are not given the date it will be issued,forms, instructions, and publications.pendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi-
please wait until the next week beforeviduals whose income is below a certain level • Order IRS products online. checking back.and who need to resolve a tax problem. These
• Research your tax questions online.clinics provide professional representation • Other refund information. To check the
before the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax status of a prior±year refund or amended• Search publications online by topic or
collection disputes, and other issues for free or return refund, call 1-800-829-1040.keyword.
for a small fee. Some clinics can provide infor-
• Use the online Internal Revenue Code,mation about taxpayer rights and responsibili- Evaluating the quality of our telephoneregulations, or other official guidance.ties in many different languages for individuals services. To ensure IRS representatives give
who speak English as a second language. For • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) accurate, courteous, and professional answers,more information and to find a clinic near you, published in the last few years. we use several methods to evaluate the qualitysee the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advocate or of our telephone services. One method is for a• Figure your withholding allowances usingIRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer second IRS representative to listen in on orthe withholding calculator online at Clinic List. This publication is also available by record random telephone calls. Another is to askwww.irs.gov/individuals.calling 1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS of- some callers to complete a short survey at thefice. • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by end of the call.
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS
Walk-in. Many products and servicesAssistant available online at www.irs.gov/Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS
are available on a walk-in basis.individuals.services and resources. Learn about free tax
information from the IRS, including publications, • Sign up to receive local and national tax
services, and education and assistance pro- • Products. You can walk in to many postnews by email.
grams. The publication also has an index of over offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up• Get information on starting and operating100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) certain forms, instructions, and publica-a small business.you can listen to on the telephone. The majority tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
of the information and services listed in this stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
publication are available to you free of charge. If ernment offices, credit unions, and officethere is a fee associated with a resource or Phone. Many services are available by supply stores have a collection of productsservice, it is listed in the publication. phone. available to print from a CD or photocopyAccessible versions of IRS published prod-
 from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSucts are available on request in a variety of offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-alternative formats for people with disabilities. enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuetions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-(1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearFree help with your return. Free help in pre-
paring your return is available nationwide from forms, instructions, and publications, and able for research purposes.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Services. You can walk in to your local look in the phone book under United • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- sponse system.States Government, Internal Revenue
ness day for personal, face-to-face tax Service. • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thehelp. An employee can explain IRS letters, U.S. Code.request adjustments to your tax account, Mail. You can send your order for • Links to other Internet based Tax Re-or help you set up a payment plan. If you forms, instructions, and publications to search Materials.need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- the address below. You should receive
tions about how the tax law applies to your a response within 10 days after your request is • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxindividual tax return, or you are more com- forms.received.fortable talking with someone in person,
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
Internal Revenue ServiceCenter where you can spread out your • Toll-free and email technical support.1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayrecords and talk with an IRS representa-
• Two releases during the year.tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
± The first release will ship the beginningessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you
DVD for tax products. You can order of January 2012.can call your local Center and leave a
Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products ± The final release will ship the beginningmessage requesting an appointment to re-
DVD, and obtain: of March 2012.solve a tax account issue. A representa-
tive will call you back within 2 business • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- Purchase the DVD from National Technicaldays to schedule an in-person appoint- lications. Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ment at your convenience. If you have an
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callongoing, complex tax account problem or
tions. 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30a special need, such as a disability, an
(plus a $6 handling fee).appointment can be requested. All other • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andissues will be handled without an appoint- finding aid.ment. To find the number of your local
• Tax law frequently asked questions.office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 49 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Circulation costs, newspapers Experimentation costs .... . 21, Below-market ............. . 14A
and periodicals .......... . 23 32 Business expense for ...... . 10Advertising ................. . 43
Capitalized ................ . 13Cleanup costs, Exploration costs .......... . 22Amortization:
Carrying charge ........... . 21environmental ............ . 23Anti-abuse rule ............ . 30 Deductible ................ . 12Club dues .................. . 44Anti-churning rules ........ . 29 F Forgone .................. . 14Comments on publication ... . 1Atmospheric pollution control Fees: Life insurance policies ..... . 13facilities ................ . 32 Commitment fees .......... . 13 Commitment .............. . 13 Not deductible ............ . 13Corporate organization Computer software ......... . 29 Legal and professional ..... . 44 Refunds of ................ . 14costs ................... . 26 Constant-yield method, Regulatory ................ . 45 When to deduct ........... . 14Dispositions of section 197 OID ...................... . 12 Tax return preparation ..... . 45 Internet-relatedintangibles .............. . 31 Contested liability ........... . 5 Fines ....................... . 45 expenses ................ . 44Experimental costs ........ . 32 Contributions: Forgone interest ........... . 14 Interview expenses ......... . 44Geological and geophysical Charitable ................ . 44 Form:costs ................... . 32 Political ................... . 45 3115 ................. . 16, 30How to deduct ............ . 26 KCopyrights ................. . 28 4562 ..................... . 26Incorrect amount Key person ................. . 13Cost depletion ............. . 33 5213 ...................... . 5deducted ............... . 30 Kickbacks .................. . 43Cost of getting lease ..... . 9, 28 8826 ..................... . 25Partnership organization 8885 ..................... . 20Cost of goods sold .......... . 2costs ................... . 27 T ......................... . 38Cost recovery ............... . 3 LPollution control facilities ... . 32
Franchise .............. . 29, 44Covenant not to Leases:Reforestation costs ........ . 31
Franchise taxes ............ . 17compete ................. . 29 Canceling .................. . 8Reforestation expenses .... . 24
Free tax services ........... . 46 Cost of getting .......... . 9, 28Credit card convenienceRelated person ............ . 30
Improvements by lessee ... . 10fees ...................... . 44 Fringe benefits .............. . 7Research costs ........... . 32
Leveraged ................. . 9Section 197 intangibles Fuel taxes .................. . 17
Mineral ................... . 37defined ................. . 28
D Oil and gas ............... . 37Starting a business
G Sales distinguished ......... . 8De minimis OID ............ . 12costs ................... . 26
Taxes on .................. . 9Gas wells .................. . 36Debt-financedStart-up costs ............. . 26
Legal and professionaldistributions ............. . 12 Geological and geophysicalAnticipated liabilities ....... . 43
fees ...................... . 44costs:Definitions:Assessments, local ........ . 16
Development, oil and Licenses ............... . 28, 45Business bad debt ......... . 38Assistance  (See Tax help) gas ..................... . 32 Life insurance coverage ..... . 7Necessary expense ........ . 2At-risk limits ................ . 4 Exploration, oil and gas .... . 32Ordinary expense .......... . 2 Limit on deductions ......... . 5Attorney fees ............... . 44 Geothermal wells ....... . 22, 36Section 197 intangibles .... . 28 Line of credit ............... . 12Awards .................... . 6, 7 Gifts, nominal value ......... . 7Demolition expenses ....... . 44 Loans:
Going into business ...... . 3, 26 Below-market interestDepletion:
Goodwill ................... . 28 rate .................... . 14Mineral property ........... . 33B
Discounted ............... . 14Oil and gas wells .......... . 34Bad debts:
Loans or Advances .......... . 8Percentage table .......... . 37Defined ................... . 38 H Lobbying expenses ........ . 45Timber .................... . 37How to treat ............... . 39 Health insurance, deduction forWho can claim ............ . 33Recovery ................. . 40 Long-term careself-employed ............ . 18 insurance ................ . 18Types of .................. . 39 Depreciation  (See Cost Heating equipment .......... . 3When worthless ........... . 39 recovery) Losses .................... . 4, 5Help  (See Tax help) At-risk limits ................ . 4Bonuses: Development costs,
Net operating .............. . 4miners ................... . 23Employee .................. . 7
Passive activities ........... . 4Royalties ................. . 37 Disabled, improvements I
for ....................... . 24Bribes ...................... . 43 Impairment-related
Drilling and developmentBrownfields  (See Environmental expenses ................ . 44 M
costs ..................... . 22cleanup costs) Improvements ............... . 3 Machinery parts ............. . 3
Dues, membership ......... . 44Business: By lessee ................. . 10 Meals ...................... . 41Assets ..................... . 3 For disabled and elderly ... . 24 Meals and entertainment ... . 42Books and records ........ . 28 Income taxes ............... . 16 Meals and lodging ........... . 7EMeal expenses ............ . 42 Incorrect amount of Methods of accounting ...... . 4Economic interest .......... . 33Use of car .............. . 4, 43 amortization deducted ... . 30 Mining:Economic performance ..... . 4Use of home ............... . 3 Insurance: Depletion ................. . 36Education expenses ...... . 7, 44 Capitalized premiums ...... . 20 Development costs ........ . 23Elderly, improvements Deductible premiums ...... . 17 Exploration costs .......... . 22C for ....................... . 24 Nondeductible More information  (See Tax help)Campaign contribution ..... . 45 Employee benefit premiums ............... . 20 Mortgage ................... . 12Capital expenses ............ . 3 programs ................. . 7 Self-employed Moving expenses,Capitalization of interest ... . 13 Employment taxes ......... . 16 individuals .............. . 18 machinery ............... . 45Car allowance .............. . 42 Entertainment .............. . 41 Intangible drilling costs .... . 22
Car and truck expenses .... . 43 Environmental cleanup Intangibles, amortization ... . 28
Carrying charges ........... . 21 (remediation) costs ...... . 23 NInterest:
Charitable contributions .... . 44 Excise taxes ............... . 17 Allocation of ............... . 10 Natural gas ................. . 36
Publication 535 (2011) Page 49

Page 50 of 50 of Publication 535 16:19 - 13-MAR-2012
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualifying Percentage depletion ....... . 34 Removal ................... . 24 Fuel ...................... . 17
intangibles ............... . 29 Income ................... . 16Personal property tax ...... . 17 Rent expense,
Leased property ............ . 9Not-for-profit activities ...... . 5 capitalizing ............... . 10Political contributions ...... . 45
Personal property ......... . 17Repairs .................... . 46Pollution control Real estate ............... . 16facilities .................. . 32 Repayments (claim ofO Sales ..................... . 17right) ..................... . 46Prepaid expense ............ . 4Office in home .............. . 3 Unemployment fund ....... . 17Extends useful life ......... . 20 Research costs ........ . 21, 32Oil and gas wells: Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 46Interest ................... . 14Depletion ................. . 34 Telephone .................. . 46Rent ....................... . 8Drilling costs .............. . 22 S Timber ................. . 31, 37Prepayment penalty ........ . 12Partnerships .............. . 36 Sales taxes ................. . 17 Tools ........................ . 3Presumption of profit ........ . 5S corporations ............ . 36 Section 179 expense deduction Trademark, trade name .... . 29,Publications  (See Tax help)Optional write-off method: (See Cost recovery) 44Circulation costs .......... . 33 Self-employed health insurance Travel ...................... . 41Experimental costs ........ . 33 R deduction ................ . 18 TTY/TDD information ....... . 46Intangible drilling and Real estate taxes ........... . 16 Self-employment tax ....... . 17development costs ...... . 33 Recapture: Self-insurance, reserveMining exploration and UExploration expenses ...... . 22 for ....................... . 20development costs ...... . 33 Unemployment fundTimber property ........... . 32 Sick pay ..................... . 8Research costs ........... . 33 taxes ..................... . 17Recordkeeping ............. . 36 Standard meal allowance ... . 42Organization costs: Unpaid expenses, relatedRecovery of amount Standard mileage rate ...... . 42Corporate ................. . 26 person ................... . 14deducted .................. . 4 Standby charges ........... . 13Partnership ............... . 27 Utilities ..................... . 46Refiners who cannot claim Start-up costs .......... . 24, 26Organizational costs ....... . 24 percentage depletion ..... . 34 Subscriptions .............. . 46Original issue discount ..... . 12 Reforestation costs .... . 24, 31 VSuggestions forOutplacement services ..... . 45 Regulatory fees ............ . 45 Vacation pay ................ . 8publication ................ . 1
Reimbursements ........... . 41 Supplies and materials ..... . 46P Business expenses ......... . 8 WPassive activities ............ . 4 Mileage ................... . 42 Wages:TPayments in kind ............ . 4 Nonaccountable plan ...... . 43 Property ................... . 8Tax help .................... . 46Per diem .................. . 42Penalties ................... . 12 Tests for deducting pay ..... . 6Tax preparation fees ....... . 45Deductible ................ . 45 Related persons: Welfare benefit funds ........ . 7Taxes ....................... . 9Nondeductible ............ . 45 Anti-churning rules ........ . 30
Carrying charge ........... . 21Prepayment ............... . 12 Coal or iron ore ........... . 37 ■
Employment .............. . 16Payments to ............ . 5, 14Per diem and car
Excise .................... . 17Refiners .................. . 35allowances ............... . 42
Franchise ................. . 17Unreasonable rent .......... . 8
Page 50 Publication 535 (2011)