Userid: ________ Leading adjust: % ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P525.SGM ( 6-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\fmzhb\documents\Epicfiles\05P525.SGM
Page 1 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
What’s New ..................... 1Department
of the Reminders ...................... 2Taxable andTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Nontaxable Employee Compensation ........... 2Service
Miscellaneous Compensation....... 3
Fringe Benefits................ 4Income Retirement Plan Contributions...... 8
Stock Options................. 10
Restricted Property.............. 11
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 12
Clergy ...................... 122005 Returns Members of Religious Orders....... 13
Foreign Employer............... 13
Military...................... 13
Volunteers................... 13
Business and Investment Income..... 14
Rents From Personal Property...... 14
Royalties.................... 14
Partnership Income............. 15
S Corporation Income............ 15
Sickness and Injury Benefits......... 15
Disability Pensions.............. 15
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts................. 16
Workers’ Compensation.......... 16
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits.................. 16
Miscellaneous Income ............. 17
Bartering.................... 17
Canceled Debts................ 17
Host or Hostess................ 19
Life Insurance Proceeds.......... 19
Recoveries................... 19
Survivor Benefits............... 26
Unemployment Benefits.......... 26
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits.......... 27
Other Income................. 28
Repayments .................... 32
How To Get Tax Help.............. 33
Index.......................... 35
What’s New
Hurricane Katrina relief provisions.
At the time this publication went to
print, Congress was considering leg-
islation that would provide additional
CAUTION
!
tax relief for individuals affected by Hurricanes
Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. For more details, and
to find out if this legislation was enacted, see
Publication 4492.
Get forms and other information
The Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act offaster and easier by: 2005 provides tax relief for persons affected by
Hurricane Katrina. Some of the provisions are
Internet • www.irs.gov covered in this publication. For information on
other provisions, see Publication 4492.

Page 2 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Canceled nonbusiness debt. If you qualify, tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- accounting, you can defer prepaid income you
you can exclude from income the amount of a est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, receive for services to be performed before the
canceled nonbusiness debt. See Exceptions, and royalties). end of the next tax year. In this case, you include
under Canceled Debts.  If you reside outside the United States, you the payment in your income as you earn it by
Mileage reimbursements to charitable may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign performing the services.
volunteers. You can exclude from income source earned income. For details, see Publica-Comments and suggestions. We welcomeamounts you receive as mileage reimburse- tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-your comments about this publication and yourments from qualified charitable organizations for dent Aliens Abroad. suggestions for future editions.the use of a private passenger automobile and You can write to us at the following address:Photographs of missing children.The Inter-for the benefit of the organization in connection
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thewith providing relief related to Hurricane Katrina. Internal Revenue ServiceNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-The amount you can exclude from income can Individual Forms and Publications Branchdren. Photographs of missing children selectedbe up to the standard business mileage rate. SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Iby the Center may appear in this publication onSee Volunteers, for more information. 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
Washington, DC 20224Donation of accrued leave.If your employer help bring these children home by looking at the
has adopted a leave-based donation program tophotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
We respond to many letters by telephone.aid victims of Hurricane Katrina, you can elect to (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-give up vacation, sick, or personal leave in ex-
clude your daytime phone number, including thechange for cash payments your employer
area code, in your correspondence.makes to a qualified organization. These pay-
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thements are not included in your income. For moreIntroduction asterisk must be included in the address.)information, see Donated accrued leave under You can receive income in the form of money,Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-Employee Compensation. property, or services. This publication discussesject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
many kinds of income and explains whetherDisaster mitigation payments.You can ex- ally to each email, we do appreciate your
they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-clude from income grants you use to mitigate feedback and will consider your comments as
cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-(reduce the severity of) potential damage from we revise our tax products.
fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, Sfuture natural disasters that is paid to you Tax questions. If you have a tax question,corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-through state and local governments. If you re- visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Wemation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-ported income from qualified disaster mitigation cannot answer tax questions at either of theceeds, and welfare and other public assistancepayments in previous years, you may be able to addresses listed above.benefits. Check the index for the location of afile a claim for refund. For more information, see
specific subject.Disaster mitigation payments under Welfare and Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Generally, an amount included in your in-Other Public Assistance Benefits. www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.empted by law. Income that is taxable must beNational Distribution Center at the address
Generally, all amounts deferred under a non-reported on your return and is subject to tax.shown under How To Get Tax Help in the back
qualified deferred compensation plan for all taxIncome that is nontaxable may have to be of this publication.
years are included in gross income for the cur-shown on your tax return but is not taxable.
rent year, unless certain requirements are met. Useful ItemsConstructively received income.You areSee Nonqualified deferred compensation plans, You may want to see:generally taxed on income that is available tounder Employee Compensation.
you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourPublicationElective deferrals.The limit on the amount ofpossession.
your wages you can elect to defer into certainA valid check that you received or that was❏ 523 Selling Your Home
retirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans)made available to you before the end of the tax❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertyincreases each year through 2006. If you areyear is considered income constructively re- (Including Rental of Vacationage 50 or older, you may be able to make addi-ceived in that year, even if you do not cash the Homes)tional catch-up elective deferrals. See Elective check or deposit it to your account until the next
Deferrals in the discussion on retirement planyear. For example, if the postal service tries to❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
contributions under Employee Compensation. deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax (Including Capital Gains and
year but you are not at home to receive it, you Losses)
must include the amount in your income for that❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andtax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldAdministratorsnot possibly reach you until after the end of theReminders
tax year, and you could not otherwise get the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
funds before the end of the year, you include theTerrorist attacks.You can exclude from in- ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Incomeamount in your income for the next tax year.come certain disaster assistance, disability, and
❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentdeath payments received as a result of a terror-Assignment of income. Income received Railroad Retirement Benefitsist or military action. For more information, seeby an agent for you is income you constructively
Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-received in the year the agent received it. If you❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
rorist Attacks. agree by contract that a third party is to receiveSee How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofAstronauts.  You can also exclude deathincome for you, you must include the amount inthis publication, for information about gettingpayments for astronauts dying in the line of dutyyour income when the third party receives it.these publications.after 2002.
Example. You and your employer agreeForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen orthat part of your salary is to be paid directly toresident alien, you must report income fromyour former spouse. You must include thatsources outside the United States (foreign in- Employeeamount in your income when your formercome) on your tax return unless it is exempt byspouse receives it.U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside Compensation
or outside the United States and whether or notPrepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- compensation for future services, is generally Generally, you must include in gross income
ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This included in your income in the year you receive everything you receive in payment for personal
applies to earned income (such as wages and it. However, if you use an accrual method of services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-
Page 2

Page 3 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.sions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofEmployee achievement award. If you re-
Your employer will report to you the total amountcompensation such as fringe benefits and stockceive tangible personal property (other than
of deferrals for the year under a nonqualifiedoptions. cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as
deferred compensation plan. This amount is   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage andan award for length-of-service or safety achieve-
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. ThisTax Statement, from your employer showing thement, you generally can exclude its value from
amount is not included in your income.pay you received for your services. Include youryour income. However, the amount you can ex-
However, if at any time during the tax year,pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or onclude is limited to your employer’s cost and
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or isline 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards
not operated under those requirements, allceive a Form W-2. that are not qualified plan awards) for all such
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax yearawards you receive during the year. Your em-Childcare providers. If you provide child and all preceding tax years are included in yourployer can tell you whether your award is acare, either in the child’s home or in your home income for the current year. This amount is in-qualified plan award. Your employer must makeor other place of business, the pay you receive cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, boxthe award as part of a meaningful presentation,must be included in your income. If you are not 1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, usingunder conditions and circumstances that do notan employee, you are probably self-employed code Z.create a significant likelihood of it being dis-and must include payments for your services on For information on the requirements and theguised pay.Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From amount to include in income, see Internal Reve-However, the exclusion does not apply to theBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net nue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. Thefollowing awards.Profit From Business. You generally are not an notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle-
employee unless you are subject to the will and• A length-of-service award if you received ittin 2005-2 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
control of the person who employs you as to for less than 5 years of service or if youirb05-02.pdf.
what you are to do and how you are to do it.received another length-of-service award
Note received for services.If your employerduring the year or the previous 4 years.Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives or gives you a secured note as payment for yourneighborhood children, whether on a regular• A safety achievement award if you are aservices, you must include the fair market valuebasis or only periodically, the rules for childcaremanager, administrator, clerical employee,(usually the discount value) of the note in yourproviders apply to you. or other professional employee or if moreincome for the year you receive it. When you
than 10% of eligible employees previouslylater receive payments on the note, a propor-
Miscellaneous received safety achievement awards dur-tionate part of each payment is the recovery of
ing the year. the fair market value that you previously in-Compensation
cluded in your income. Do not include that part
This section discusses many types of employee again in your income. Include the rest of theExample. Ben Green received three em-compensation. The subjects are arranged in al- payment in your income in the year of payment.ployee achievement awards during the year: aphabetical order. If your employer gives you a nonnegotiablenonqualified plan award of a watch valued at
unsecured note as payment for your services,$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoAdvance commissions and other earnings. payments on the note that are credited towardvalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atIf you receive advance commissions or other the principal amount of the note are compensa-$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-amounts for services to be performed in the tion income when you receive them.fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachfuture and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you
award by itself would be excluded from income.must include these amounts in your income in Severance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-However, because the $1,750 total value of thethe year you receive them. erance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentawards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeIf you repay unearned commissions or other for cancellation of your employment contract$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.amounts in the same year you receive them, must be included in your income in the tax year
reduce the amount included in your income by you receive it.Donated accrued leave.If your employer hasthe repayment. If you repay them in a later tax
Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed-adopted a leave-based donation program to aidyear, you can deduct the repayment as an item-
eral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentvictims of Hurricane Katrina, you can elect toized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),
for accrued annual leave when you retire orgive up vacation, sick, or personal leave in ex-or you may be able to take a credit for that year.
resign, this amount will be included as wages onchange for cash payments your employerSee Repayments, later.
your Form W-2.makes to a qualified tax-exempt organization for
Allowances and reimbursements.   If you If you resign from one agency and are reem-the relief of those victims. Your employer must
receive travel, transportation, or other business ployed by another agency, you may have tomake the payments to the organizations before
expense allowances or reimbursements from repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-January 1, 2007. These payments are not in-
your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En- ment to the second agency. You can reducecluded in your income and you do not get a
tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are gross wages by the amount you repaid in thededuction for the payments made to the organi-
reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica- same tax year in which you received it. Attach tozation. For more information on qualifying orga-
tion 521, Moving Expenses. your tax return a copy of the receipt or statementnizations, see Organizations That Qualify To
given to you by the agency you repaid to explainReceive Deductible Contributions, in PublicationBack pay awards. Include in income amounts the difference between the wages on your return526, Charitable Contributions.you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for and the wages on your Forms W-2.back pay. These include payments made to youGovernment cost-of-living allowances. Outplacement services. If you choose tofor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Cost-of-living allowances generally are includedaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soand unpaid health insurance premiums. Theyin your income. However, they are not includedthat you can receive outplacement servicesshould be reported to you by your employer onin your income if you are a federal civilian em-(such as training in r´esum´e writing and interviewForm W-2. ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-techniques), you must include the unreducedtioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the UnitedBonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards amount of the severance pay in income.States.you receive for outstanding work are included in However, you can deduct the value of theseAllowances and differentials that increaseyour income and should be shown on your Form outplacement services (up to the difference be-your basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessW-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips tween the severance pay included in incomedesirable post of duty are part of your compen-for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you and the amount actually received) as a miscella-sation and must be included in income. Forreceive is goods or services, you must include neous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjustedexample, your compensation includes Foreignthe fair market value of the goods or services in gross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (FormPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicalyour income. However, if your employer merely 1040).differentials. For more information, see Publica-promises to pay you a bonus or award at some
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesfuture time, it is not taxable until you receive it or Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer
Stationed Abroad.it is made available to you. while you are sick or injured is part of your salary
Page 3

Page 4 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).or wages. In addition, you must include in your benefit to you. The provider can be a client or
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifiesincome sick pay benefits received from any of customer of an independent contractor.
the following payers. as an accident or health plan, coverage and
Accounting period. You must use the same reimbursements of your medical care expenses• A welfare fund. accounting period your employer uses to reportand those of your spouse and dependents gen-
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-• A state sickness or disability fund. erally are not included in your income.
ployer has the option to report taxable noncashSee also Reimbursement for medical care• An association of employers or employ-fringe benefits by using either of the followingunder Other Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.ees. rules.
• An insurance company, if your employer • The general rule: benefits are reported forHealth savings accounts (HSA).If you arepaid for the plan. a full calendar year (January 1 – Decem-an eligible individual, you and any other person,
ber 31).However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- including your employer or a family member,
dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-• The special accounting period rule: bene-receive under the policy are not taxable. For tions, other than employer contributions, are de-fits provided during the last 2 months ofmore information, see Other Sickness and Injury ductible on your return whether or not youthe calendar year (or any shorter period)Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits, itemize deductions. Contributions made by yourare treated as paid during the followinglater. employer are not included in your income. Distri-calendar year. For example, each year
butions from your HSA that are used to payyour employer reports the value of bene-Social security and Medicare taxes paid by qualified medical expenses are not included infits provided during the last 2 months ofemployer. If you and your employer have an your income. Distributions not used for qualifiedthe prior year and the first 10 months ofagreement that your employer pays your social medical expenses are included in your income.the current year.security and Medicare taxes without deducting See Publication 969, Health Savings Accountsthem from your gross wages, you must report Your employer does not have to use the sameand Other Tax-Favored Health Plans, for morethe amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages accounting period for each fringe benefit, butinformation.on your tax return. The payment is also treated must use the same period for all employees whoContributions by a partnership to a bona fideas wages for figuring your social security and receive a particular benefit.
partner’s HSA are not contributions by an em-Medicare taxes and your social security andYou must use the same accounting periodployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsthat you use to report the benefit to claim anbution of money and are not included in theare not treated as social security and Medicareemployee business deduction (for use of a car,partner’s gross income. Contributions by a part-wages if you are a household worker or a farmfor example). nership to a partner’s HSA for services renderedworker.
are treated as guaranteed payments that areForm W-2. Your employer reports your tax-Stock appreciation rights.Do not include a includible in the partner’s gross income. In bothable fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherstock appreciation right granted by your em- situations, the partner can deduct the contribu-compensation) of Form W-2. The total value ofployer in income until you exercise (use) the tion made to the partner’s HSA.your fringe benefits may also be noted in box 14.right. When you use the right, you are entitled to Contributions by an S corporation to a 2%The value of your fringe benefits may be addeda cash payment equal to the fair market value of shareholder-employee’s HSA for services ren-to your other compensation on one Form W-2, orthe corporation’s stock on the date of use, minus dered are treated as guaranteed payments andyou may receive a separate Form W-2 showingthe fair market value on the date the right was are includible in the shareholder-employee’sjust the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withgranted. You include the cash payment in in- gross income. The shareholder-employee cana notation in box 14.come in the year you use the right. deduct the contribution made to the
shareholder-employee’s HSA.
Fringe Benefits Accident or Health Plan
Fringe benefits received in connection with theGenerally, the value of accident or health planAdoption Assistance
performance of your services are included incoverage provided to you by your employer is
your income as compensation unless you pay You may be able to exclude from your incomenot included in your income. Benefits you re-
fair market value for them or they are specifically amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-
excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform- ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-plained, later, under Sickness and Injury
ance of services (for example, under a covenantBenefits. nection with your adoption of an eligible child.
not to compete) is treated as the performance of See Instructions for Form 8839 (Qualified Adop-
services for purposes of these rules. Long-term care coverage. Contributions bytion Expenses), for more information.
See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thisyour employer to provide coverage for long-termAdoption benefits are reported by your em-discussion, for information on how to determinecare services generally are not included in yourployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. Theythe amount to include in income. income. However, contributions made through aalso are included as social security and Medi-flexible spending or similar arrangement (suchcare wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areRecipient of fringe benefit.You are the re- as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yournot included as wages in box 1. To determinecipient of a fringe benefit if you perform theincome. This amount will be reported as wagesthe taxable and nontaxable amounts, you mustservices for which the fringe benefit is provided.in box 1 of your Form W-2. complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-You are considered to be the recipient even if it
tion Expenses. File the form with your return.is given to another person, such as a member ofArcher MSA contributions.Contributions by
your family. An example is a car your employeryour employer to your Archer MSA generally are
gives to your spouse for services you perform.not included in your income. Their total will beAthletic FacilitiesThe car is considered to have been provided toreported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.
you and not to your spouse. You must report this amount on Form 8853,If your employer provides you with the free orYou do not have to be an employee of theArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance low-cost use of an employer-operated gym orprovider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. IfContracts. File the form with your return.other athletic club on your employer’s premises,you are a partner, director, or independent con- the value is not included in your compensation.Health flexible spending arrangementtractor, you can also be the recipient of a fringe The gym must be used primarily by employees,(health FSA). If your employer provides abenefit. their spouses, and their dependent children.health FSA that qualifies as an accident or
If your employer pays for a fitness programProvider of benefit.Your employer or an- health plan, the amount of your salary reduction,
provided to you at an off-site resort hotel orother person for whom you perform services is and reimbursements of your medical care ex-
athletic club, the value of the program is in-the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of penses and those of your spouse and depen-
cluded in your compensation.whether that person actually provides the fringe dents, generally are not included in your income.
Page 4

Page 5 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of your Form W-2. It is also shown separately inDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits Educational Assistance
box 12 with code C.
If your employer provides you with a product or You can exclude from your income up to $5,250
service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldof qualified employer-provided educational as-Group-term life insurance.This insurance isbe unreasonable for the employer to account forsistance. For more information, see Publicationterm life insurance protection (insurance for ait, the value is not included in your income.970. fixed period of time) that:Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home • Provides a general death benefit,when working overtime, and company picnicsEmployee Discounts
are not included in your income. Also see Em- • Is provided to a group of employees,
If your employer sells you property or services atployee Discounts, later. • Is provided under a policy carried by thea discount, you may be able to exclude theHoliday gifts.If your employer gives you a employer, andamount of the discount from your income. Theturkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atexclusion applies to discounts on property or• Provides an amount of insurance to eachChristmas or other holidays, do not include the employee based on a formula that pre-services offered to customers in the ordinaryvalue of the gift in your income. However, if your vents individual selection.course of the line of business in which you work.employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a
However, it does not apply to discounts on realsimilar item that you can easily exchange for Permanent benefits.If your group-term lifeproperty or property commonly held for invest-cash, you include the value of that gift as extra insurance policy includes permanent benefits,ment (such as stocks or bonds).salary or wages regardless of the amount in- such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youvolved. The exclusion is limited to the price chargedmust include in your income, as wages, the costnonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
lowing percentage. pay for them. Your employer should be able toDependent Care Benefits
tell you the amount to include in your income.• For a discount on property, yourIf your employer provides dependent care bene- Accidental death benefits.Insurance thatemployer’s gross profit percentage (grossfits under a qualified plan, you may be able to provides accidental or other death benefits butprofit divided by gross sales) on all prop-exclude these benefits from your income. De- does not provide general death benefits (travelerty sold during the employer’s previouspendent care benefits include: insurance, for example) is not group-term lifetax year. (Ask your employer for this per-
• Amounts your employer pays directly to insurance.centage.)
either you or your care provider for the
• For a discount on services, 20%.care of your qualifying person while you Former employer. If your former employerwork, and provided more than $50,000 of group-term life
Financial Counseling Fees• The fair market value of care in a daycare insurance coverage during the year, the amount
facility provided or sponsored by your em- included in your income is reported as wages inFinancial counseling fees paid for you by yourployer. box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelyemployer are included in your income and mustin box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show thebe reported as part of wages. If the fees are forThe amount you can exclude is limited to the amount of uncollected social security and Medi-tax or investment counseling, they can be de-lesser of: care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-M and N. You must pay these taxes with your• The total amount of dependent care bene-laneous deduction (subject to the 2% of AGIincome tax return. Include them in your total taxfits you received during the year, limit). on line 63, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and the
• The total amount of qualified expenses amount of the taxes on the dotted line next to   Qualified retirement planning services paid
you incurred during the year, line 63.for you by your employer may be excluded from
your income. For more information, see Retire-• Your earned income,
ment Planning Services, later. Two or more employers. Your exclusion for• Your spouse’s earned income, or
employer-provided group-term life insurance
• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa- coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
Group-Term Life Insurancerately). coverage, whether the insurance is provided by
a single employer or multiple employers. If twoGenerally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofYour employer must show the total amount of or more employers provide insurance coveragegroup-term life insurance coverage provided todependent care benefits provided to you during that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-you by your employer (or former employer) is notthe year under a qualified plan in box 10 of your ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not beincluded in your income. However, you mustForm W-2. Your employer also will include any correct. You must figure how much to include ininclude in income the cost of employer-provideddependent care benefits over $5,000 in your your income. Reduce the amount you figure bywages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2. insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000any amount reported with code C in box 12 of To claim the exclusion, you must completeof coverage reduced by any amount you payyour Forms W-2, add the result to the wageseither Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-toward the purchase of the insurance. reported in box 1, and report the total on yourdent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2 return.For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex-excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use
If your employer provided more than $50,000Figuring the taxable cost. Use the followingForm 1040EZ.)
of coverage, the amount included in your in- worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourSee the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-
income.ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information. come is reported as part of your wages in box 1
Page 5

Page 6 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you pay any part of the cost of the insur- 2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for icy for the entire period the insurance is inGroup-Term Life Insurance To
dollar, the amount you would otherwise include force during the tax year.Include in Income
in your income. However, you cannot reduce the3. A charitable organization to which contri-amount to include in your income by:1.Enter the total amount of butions are deductible is the only benefi-your insurance coverage ciary of the policy for the entire period the• Payments for coverage in a different taxfrom your employer(s).... 1. insurance is in force during the tax year.year,
(You are not entitled to a deduction for a2.Limit on exclusion for • Payments for coverage through a cafeteriacharitable contribution for naming a chari-employer-provided plan, unless the payments are after-tax table organization as the beneficiary ofgroup-term life insurance contributions, or your policy.)coverage ............ 2. 50,000
• Payments for coverage not taxed to you4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
3.Subtract line 2 from line 13. because of the exceptions discussed later
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, andunder Entire cost excluded.
were covered by the plan when you re-4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.
Figure to the nearest tenth4. tired, orExample. You are 51 years old and work for
employers A and B. Both employers provide b. You reached age 55 before January 2,5.Go to Table 1. Using your group-term life insurance coverage for you for 1984, and were employed by the em-age on the last day of the the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with ployer or its predecessor in 1983.tax year, find your age employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Yougroup in the left column,
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-and enter the cost from the
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount tocolumn on the right for your Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entire
include in your income as follows.age group............ 5. cost of group-term life insurance if either of the
following circumstances apply.
6.Multiply line 4 by line 5 . . .6. Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of • The insurance is provided by your em-
Group-Term Life Insurance To ployer through a qualified employees’
Include in Income—Illustrated trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified
annuity plan.7.Enter the number of full
1.Enter the total amount ofmonths of coverage at this • You are a key employee and youryour insurance coveragecost................ 7. employer’s plan discriminates in favor offrom your employer(s).... 1. 80,000 key employees.2.Limit on exclusion for8.Multiply line 6 by line 7 . . .8.
employer-provided
group-term life insurance Meals and Lodging9.Enter the
coverage............. 2. 50,000premiums you
You do not include in your income the value of3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. 30,000paid per month 9.
meals and lodging provided to you and your4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.
family by your employer at no charge if theFigure to the nearest tenth4. 30.010.Enter the
following conditions are met.number of 5.Go to Table 1. Using your
months you paid age on the last day of the tax 1. The meals are:the premiums 10. year, find your age group in
the left column, and enter the a. Furnished on the business premises ofcost from the column on the11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . .11. your employer, andright for your age group . . .5. .23
6.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. 6.90 b. Furnished for the convenience of your12.Subtract line 11 from line 8.
Include this amount in employer.7.Enter the number of full
your income as wages .. 12. months of coverage at this
cost................. 7. 12 2. The lodging is:
8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8. 82.80
a. Furnished on the business premises of9.Enter the premiums
your employer,you paid per month9. 4.15Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of
10.Enter the numberGroup-Term Life Insurance for One b. Furnished for the convenience of your
of months you paidMonth employer, andthe premiums . . .10. 12
c. A condition of your employment. (You11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. 49.80Age Cost must accept it in order to be able to12.Subtract line 11 from line 8.Under 25 ............ $  . 0 5 properly perform your duties.)Include this amount in your25 through 29.........  . 0 6
income as wages ....... 12. 33.00
 You also do not include in your income the30 through 34......... . 0 8 value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a35 through 39......... . 0 9 The total amount to include in income for thede minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.mal) Benefits, earlier.40 through 44......... . 1 0 Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-
45 through 49......... . 1 5 ance coverage, so the wages shown on your
Faculty lodging.If you are an employee of anForms W-2 do not include any part of that $33.
educational institution or an academic health50 through 54......... . 2 3 You must add it to the wages shown on your
center and you are provided with lodging that55 through 59......... . 4 3 Forms W-2 and include the total on your return.
does not meet the three conditions above, you
still may not have to include the value of the60 through 64......... . 6 6 Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed onlodging in income. However, the lodging must65 through 69......... 1.27 the cost of group-term life insurance if any of thebe qualified campus lodging, and you must payfollowing circumstances apply. an adequate rent.70 and older.......... 2.06
1. You are permanently and totally disabledAcademic health center.This is an organi-
and have ended your employment. zation that meets the following conditions.
Page 6

Page 7 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to provide you with the service (regardless• On trips during which employees occupy• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-of what you paid for the service). at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingvide medical or hospital care or medical capacity (not including the driver).education or research. Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-
• It receives payments for graduate medical cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, orTransit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-education under the Social Security Act. train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-card, voucher, or similar item entitling a personices. to ride mass transit (whether public or private)• One of its principal purposes or functions
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuteris to provide and teach basic and clinicalExample. You are employed as a flight at-highway vehicle operated by a person in themedical science and research using itstendant for a company that owns both an airlinebusiness of transporting persons for compensa-own faculty. and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you totion.take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedQualified campus lodging.Qualified cam- seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if thereQualified parking.This is parking provided topus lodging is lodging furnished to you, youris an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. Thean employee at or near the employer’s place ofspouse, or one of your dependents by, or onvalue of the personal flight is not included in yourbusiness. It also includes parking provided on orbehalf of, the institution or center for use as aincome. However, the value of the hotel room isnear a location from which the employee com-home. The lodging must be located on or near aincluded in your income because you do notmutes to work by mass transit, in a commutercampus of the educational institution or aca-work in the hotel business. highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-demic health center.
clude parking at or near the employee’s home.Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay
Retirement Planning Servicesfor the year for qualified campus lodging is con-
sidered adequate if it is at least equal to the Tuition ReductionIf your employer has a qualified retirement plan,lesser of: qualified retirement planning services providedYou can exclude a qualified tuition reduction• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,to you (and your spouse) by your employer arefrom your income. This is the amount of a reduc-or not included in your income. Qualified servicestion in tuition:include retirement planning advice, information• The average of rentals paid by individuals • For education (below graduate level) fur-about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-(other than employees or students) for nished by an educational institution to anformation about how the plan may fit into yourcomparable lodging held for rent by the employee, former employee who retired oroverall individual retirement income plan. Youeducational institution. became disabled, or his or her spouse andcannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,
If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of dependent children.accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-
these amounts, you must include the differencevided by your employer. Also, see Financial • For education furnished to a graduate stu-in your income. Counseling Fees, earlier. dent at an educational institution if the
The lodging must be appraised by an inde- graduate student is engaged in teaching
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must be or research activities for that institution.Transportationreviewed on an annual basis. • Representing payment for teaching, re-
If your employer provides you with a qualifiedsearch, or other services if you receive theExample. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedamount under the National Health Servicesor for State University, rents a home from thefrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedCorps Scholarship Program or the Armeduniversity that is qualified campus lodging. Thetransportation fringe benefit is: Forces Health Professions Scholarshiphouse is appraised at $100,000. The average and Financial Assistance Program.• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-rent paid for comparable university lodging by
hicle (such as a van) between your homepersons other than employees or students is For more information, see Publication 970.
and work place,$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of
$5,500. Carl does not include in his income any Working Condition Benefits• A transit pass, orrental value because the rent he pays equals at
If your employer provides you with a product or• Qualified parking.least 5% of the appraised value of the house
service and the cost of it would have been allow-(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annualCash reimbursement by your employer for theseable as a business or depreciation deduction ifrent of only $4,000, he would have to includeexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000). rangement is also excludable. However, cashyour income.reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable
only if a voucher or similar item that can beExample. You work as an engineer andMoving Expense Reimbursements exchanged only for a transit pass is not readilyyour employer provides you with a subscriptionavailable for direct distribution to you.Generally, if your employer pays for your moving to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of
expenses (either directly or indirectly) and the the subscription is not included in your incomeExclusion limit.The exclusion for commuterexpenses would have been deductible if you because the cost would have been allowable tohighway vehicle transportation and transit passpaid them yourself, the value is not included in you as a business deduction if you had paid forfringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofyour income. See Publication 521 for more infor- the subscription yourself.$105 a month.mation.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
benefit cannot be more than $200 a month.Valuation of Fringe BenefitsIf the benefits have a value that is more thanNo-Additional-Cost Services
these limits, the excess must be included in yourIf a fringe benefit is included in your income, the
income.The value of services you receive from your amount included is generally its value deter-
employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price mined under the general valuation rule or underCommuter highway vehicle. This is a high-is not included in your income if your employer: the special valuation rules. For an exception,way vehicle that seats at least six adults (notsee Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.• Offers the same service for sale to cus-including the driver). At least 80% of the
tomers in the ordinary course of the line of vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expectedGeneral valuation rule.You must include inbusiness in which you work, and to be: your income the amount by which the fair market
• Does not have a substantial additional • For transporting employees between their value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum
cost (including any sales income given up) homes and work place, and of:
Page 7

Page 8 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information on these rules, see Pub- that the deferrals are not more than the overall
1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-lication 15-B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe limit.
fit, plus Benefits. Catch-up contributions.You may be allowed For information on the non-commercial flight2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-from your income by law. rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of yourtions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-tax year. For more information about catch-upIf you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,tions. contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 ofno amount is included in your income.
Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans
Fair market value.The fair market value ofRetirement Plan (403(b) Plans).
a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts and For more information about additional elec-Contributions
circumstances. It is the amount you would have tive deferrals to:
to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.Your employer’s contributions to a qualified re-• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary ReductionThis is determined without regard to: tirement plan for you are not included in incomeSimplified Employee Pension in Publica-at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell• Your perceived value of the benefit, or tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-you whether your retirement plan is qualified.)ness.• The amount your employer paid for theHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage
benefit. included in the plan may have to be included.• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be
See Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, under Contributed on Your Behalf in chapter 3 of
Employer-provided vehicles.If your em- Fringe Benefits. Publication 590, Individual Retirement Ar-
ployer provides a car (or other highway motorIf your employer pays into a nonqualified rangements (IRAs).
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car isplan for you, you generally must include the• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferralsusually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.contributions in your income as wages for theunder section 457 plans, later.Under the general valuation rules, the valuetax year in which the contributions are made.
of an employer-provided vehicle is the amountHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans-
you would have to pay a third party to lease theferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.If
same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at theyou are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you
rable terms in the same geographic area wheretime of the contribution, you do not have togenerally should not have deferred more than
you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-include the value of your interest in your income$10,000 in 2005.  Amounts you defer under a
ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicleuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to aSIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit
is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-substantial risk of forfeiture. ($14,000 for 2005) and may affect the amount
riod. The value cannot be determined by multi- you can defer under other elective deferral
plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number of plans.
Elective Deferralsmiles driven unless you prove the vehicle could Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis. If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (aIf you are covered by certain kinds of retirement
Flights on employer-provided aircraft. deferred compensation plan for employees ofplans, you can choose to have part of your
Under the general valuation rules, if your flight state or local governments or tax-exempt orga-compensation contributed by your employer to a
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri- nizations), you should have deferred no moreretirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.
marily personal and you control the use of the than the lesser of your includible compensationThe amount you set aside (called an elective
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount it or $14,000. However, if you are within 3 years ofdeferral) is treated as an employer contribution
would cost to charter the flight from a third party. normal retirement age, you may be allowed anto a qualified plan. It is not included in wages
If there is more than one employee on the increased limit if the plan allows it. See In-subject to income tax at the time contributed.
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be creased limit, later.However, it is included in wages subject to social
divided among those employees. The divisionsecurity and Medicare taxes. Includible compensation.This is the paymust be based on all the facts, including whichElective deferrals include elective contribu-you received for the year from the employer whoemployee or employees control the use of thetions to the following retirement plans. maintained the section 457 plan. It generallyaircraft. includes all the following payments.1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
Special valuation rules.You generally can 401(k) plans). 1. Wages and salaries.use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-2. Fees for professional services.only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-ees.ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannot 3. The value of any employer-provided quali-use a different special rule to value that benefit.3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-fied transportation fringe benefit (definedYou always can use the general valuation rulesion plans (SARSEP). under Transportation, earlier) that is notdiscussed earlier, based on facts and circum- included in your income.4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-stances, even if your employer uses a specialees (SIMPLE plans). 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)rule.
for personal services you performed, in-5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).If you and your employer use a special valua-
cluding, but not limited to, the followingtion rule, you must include in your income the6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re- items.amount your employer determines under the porting by employer, later.)special rule minus the sum of: a. Commissions and tips.7. Section 457 plans.
1. Any amount you repaid your employer, b. Fringe benefits.
plus Overall limit on deferrals.For 2005, you gen- c. Bonuses.
erally should not have deferred more than a total2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-
of $14,000 of contributions to the plans listed income by law. 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)
(1) through (6) above. You should not have to:The special valuation rules are the following.deferred more than the lesser of your includible
compensation (defined later) or $14,000 of con-a. The section 457 plan.• The automobile lease rule.
tributions to the plan listed in (7) above (sectionb. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. 457 plan). ments (section 401(k) plans) that areYour employer or plan administrator should• The commuting rule. not included in your income.apply the proper annual limit when figuring your• The unsafe conditions commuting rule.plan contributions. However, you are responsi- c. A salary reduction simplified employee
• The employer-operated eating-facility rule. ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure pension (SARSEP).
Page 8

Page 9 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)Reporting by employer.Your employer gen- Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
erally should not include elective deferrals inturn. If you did not receive the distributionplan).
your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, yourby April 15, 2005, you also must add it toe. A savings incentive match plan for em-employer should mark the Retirement plan your wages on your 2005 tax return.ployees (SIMPLE plan). checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount• If the distribution was for a 2003 excessdeferred in box 12.f. A section 125 cafeteria plan. deferral, your Form 1099-R should have
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. the code “D” in box 7. If you did not addInstead of using the amounts listed above toWages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 shouldthe excess deferral amount to your wagesdetermine your includible compensation, yournot have been reduced for contributions you on your 2003 tax return, you must file anemployer can use any of the following amounts.made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan.amended return on Form 1040X. You also
The amount you contributed should be identifiedmust add it to your wages on your 2005• Your wages as defined for income tax with code “H” in box 12. You may deduct the income tax return.withholding purposes. amount deferred subject to the limits that apply.
• If the distribution was for the income• Your wages as reported in box 1 of FormInclude your deduction in the total on Form
earned on an excess deferral, your FormW-2, Wage and Tax Statement. 1040, line 36. Enter the amount and
1099-R should have the code “8” in box 7.“501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to line 36.• Your wages that are subject to social se- Add the income amount to your wages oncurity withholding (including elective defer-Excess deferrals.If your deferrals exceed theyour 2005 income tax return, regardless ofrals). limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-when the excess deferral was made.quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
Increased limit.During any, or all, of the Report a loss on a corrective distribution of ancess amount will be distributed to you. If you
last 3 years ending before you reach normal excess deferral in the year the excess amountparticipate in more than one plan, you can have
retirement age under the plan, your plan may (reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-the excess paid out of any of the plans that
provide that your limit is the lesser of: clude the loss as a negative amount on Formpermit these distributions. You must notify each
plan by the date required by that plan of the1040, line 21 and identify it as “Loss on Excess
1. Twice the dollar limit for the year, oramount to be paid from that particular plan. TheDeferral Distribution.”
plan must then pay you the amount of the ex-2. The limit for prior years minus the amountcess, along with any income earned on that Even though a corrective distributionyou deferred in prior years plus the lesseramount, by April 15 of the following year. of excess deferrals is reported onof: You must include the excess deferral in your Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
income for the year of the deferral. File Formtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannota. Your includible compensation for the
1040 to add the excess deferral amount to yourbe rolled over into another plan, and it is notcurrent year, or
wages on line 7. Do not use Form 1040A orsubject to the additional tax on early distribu-b. The dollar limit for the current year.Form 1040EZ to report excess deferral tions.
amounts.
Catch-up contributions. You generally Excess not distributed.If you do not takeExcess Contributionscan have additional elective deferrals made toout the excess amount, you cannot include it in
your governmental section 457 plan if: the cost of the contract even though you in-If you are a highly compensated employee, thecluded it in your income. Therefore, you aretotal of your elective deferrals and other contri-• You reached age 50 by the end of the taxed twice on the excess deferral left in thebutions made for you for any year under a sec-year, and plan—once when you contribute it, and againtion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a• No other elective deferrals can be madewhen you receive it as a distribution. percentage of pay, no more than 125% of thefor you to the plan for the year because ofExcess distributed to you.If you take outaverage deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligiblelimits or restrictions. the excess after the year of the deferral and younon-highly compensated employees.
receive the corrective distribution by April 15 ofIf you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your  If the total contributed to the plan is more
the following year, do not include it in incomeincludible compensation or $14,000 ($15,000 than the amount allowed under the ADP test, the
again in the year you receive it. If you receive itfor 2006), plus $4,000 ($5,000 for 2006). How- excess contributions must be either distributed
later, you must include it in income in both theever, if you are within 3 years of retirement age to you or recharacterized as after-tax employee
year of the deferral and the year you receive it.and your plan provides the increased limit ear- contributions by treating them as distributed toAny income on the excess deferral taken out islier, that limit may be higher. you and then contributed by you to the plan. Youtaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Ifmust include the excess contributions in youryou take out part of the excess deferral and theLimit for tax-sheltered annuities.If you are a income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. Youincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion-participant in a tax-sheltered annuity plan cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ toately between the excess deferral and the in-(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for report excess contribution amounts.come.2005 generally is $14,000 ($15,000 for 2006). If you receive excess contributions from aYou should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu-However, if you have at least 15 years of service 401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orwith a public school system, a hospital, a home tributions within 21/2 months after the close of theProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-health service agency, a health and welfare plan year, you must include them in your incometracts, etc., for the year in which the excessservice agency, a church, or a convention or in the year of the contribution. If you receivedeferral is distributed to you. Use the followingassociation of churches (or associated organi- them later, or receive less than $100 excessrules to report a corrective distribution shown onzation), the limit on elective deferrals is in- contributions, include the excess contributionsForm 1099-R for 2005.creased by the least of the following amounts. and earnings in your income in the year distrib-
• If the distribution was for a 2005 excessuted. If the excess contributions are recharacter-1. $3,000. deferral, your Form 1099-R should haveized, you must include them in income in the
the code “8” in box 7. Add the excessyear a corrective distribution would have oc-2. $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-deferral amount to your wages on yourcurred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notifyall limit that you were allowed in earlier2005 tax return. you by March 15 following the year in whichyears because of this years-of-service rule.
excess contributions are made that you must• If the distribution was for a 2004 excess3. $5,000 times your number of years of serv- withdraw the excess and earnings. You mustdeferral, your Form 1099-R should haveice for the organization, minus the total include the excess contributions in your incomethe code “P” in box 7. If you did not addelective deferrals under the plan for earlier in the year of the contribution (or the year of thethe excess deferral amount to your wagesyears. notification if less than $100) and include theon your 2004 tax return, you must file an
For more information, see Publication 571. earnings in your income in the year withdrawn.amended return on Form 1040X,
Page 9

Page 10 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You should receive a Form 1099-R for the determined if it is actively traded on an estab- ceived for the transfer, as if you had exercised
year in which the excess contributions are dis- lished market. the option.
tributed to you (or are recharacterized). AddThe fair market value of an option that is notRelated person. If you transferred this kindexcess contributions or earnings shown ontraded on an established market can be readilyof option in an arm’s-length transaction to aForm 1099-R for 2005 to your wages on yourdetermined only if all of the following conditionsrelated person after July 1, 2003, the option is2005 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”exist. not treated as exercised or closed at that time,or “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an and you do not include in your income the
• You can transfer the option.amended 2004 or 2003 return on Form 1040X to money or other property you received for theadd the excess contributions or earnings to your• You can exercise the option immediatelytransfer at that time. See Regulations sectionwages in the year of the contribution. in full. 1.83-7 for the definition of a related person.
Even though a corrective distribution• The option or the property subject to theRecourse note in satisfaction of the exer-of excess contributions is reported onoption is not subject to any condition orcise price of an option.If you are an em-Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise restriction (other than a condition to se-
TIP
ployee, and you issue a recourse note to yourtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotcure payment of the purchase price) thatemployer in satisfaction of the exercise price ofbe rolled over into another plan, and it is nothas a significant effect on the fair marketan option to acquire your employer’s stock, andsubject to the additional tax on early distribu-value of the option. your employer and you subsequently agree totions. reduce the stated principal amount of the note,• The fair market value of the option privi-
you generally recognize compensation incomelege can be readily determined.
at the time and in the amount of the reduction.Excess Annual Additions The option privilege for an option to buy is the
opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-Tax form. If you receive compensation fromThe amount contributed in 2005 to a definedcise period from any increase in the value ofemployer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itcontribution plan is generally limited to theproperty subject to the option without risking anyis reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It is alsolesser of 100% of your compensation or capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-reported in box 12 using code “V.”$42,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-riod the fair market value of stock subject to an If you are a nonemployee spouse and youtions that exceed these limits (excess annualoption is greater than the option’s exercise price,exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofa profit may be realized by exercising the optionceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-your elective deferrals or a return of yourand immediately selling the stock at its higherported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscella-after-tax contributions and earnings from thesevalue. The option privilege for an option to sell isneous Income, in box 3.contributions. the opportunity to benefit during the exercise
A corrective payment of excess annual addi-period from a decrease in the value of the prop-
tions consisting of elective deferrals or earningserty subject to the option. Statutory Stock Optionsfrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxable
in the year paid. A corrective payment consistingIf you or a member of your family is anThere are two kinds of statutory stock options.of your after-tax contributions is not taxable. officer, director, or more-than-10%
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), andowner of an expatriated corporation,CAUTION
!
If you received a corrective payment of ex-
you may owe an excise tax on the value ofcess annual additions, you should receive a • Options granted under employee stocknonstatutory options and other stock-basedseparate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay- purchase plans.compensation from that corporation. For morement with the code “E” in box 7. Report the total
information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve-payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on line For either kind of option, you must be annue Code section 4985.16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A. employee of the company granting the option, or
Report the taxable amount shown in box 2a of a related company, at all times beginning withOption with readily determined value.If youForm 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or line the date the option is granted, until 3 monthsreceive a nonstatutory stock option that has a12b of Form 1040A. before you exercise the option (for an incentivereadily determined fair market value at the time itstock option, 1 year before if you are disabled).Even though a corrective distributionis granted to you, the option is treated like otherAlso, the option must be nontransferable exceptof excess annual additions is reportedproperty received as compensation. See Re- at death. If you do not meet the employmenton Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
stricted Property, later, for rules on how muchrequirements, or you receive a transferable op-treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotincome to include and when to include it. How-tion, your option is a nonstatutory stock option.be rolled over into another plan, and it is notever, the rule described in that discussion forSee Nonstatutory Stock Options, earlier in thissubject to the additional tax on early distribu-choosing to include the value of property in yourdiscussion.tions. income for the year of the transfer does notIf you receive a statutory stock option, do notapply to a nonstatutory option. include any amount in your income either whenStock Options the option is granted or when you exercise it.Option without readily determined value.If You have taxable income or a deductible lossIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellthe fair market value of the option is not readilywhen you sell the stock that you bought bystock or other property as payment for yourdetermined at the time it is granted to you (evenexercising the option. Your income or loss is theservices, you usually will have income when youif it is determined later), you do not have incomedifference between the amount you paid for thereceive the option, when you exercise the optionuntil you transfer or exercise the option. Whenstock (the option price) and the amount you(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),you exercise this kind of option, the restrictedreceive when you sell it. You generally treat thisor when you sell or otherwise dispose of theproperty rules apply to the property received.amount as capital gain or loss and report it onoption. However, if your option is a statutoryThe amount to include in your income is theSchedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains andstock option (defined later), you will not have anydifference between the amount you pay for theLosses, for the year of the sale.income until you sell or exchange your stock.property and its fair market value when it be-
Your employer can tell you which kind of option However, you may have ordinary income forcomes substantially vested. Your basis in the
you hold. the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of theproperty you acquire under the option is the
stock in either of the following situations.amount you pay for it plus any amount you must
include in your gross income under this rule. For• You do not meet the holding period re-Nonstatutory Stock Options more information on restricted property, see Re- quirement. This situation generally appliesstricted Property, later. if you sell the stock within 1 year after itsIf you are granted a nonstatutory stock option,
transfer to you or within 2 years after thethe amount of income to include and the time toUnrelated person. If you transferred this
option was granted. However, you areinclude it depend on whether the fair market kind of option in an arm’s-length transaction to
considered to meet the holding period re-value of the option can be readily determined. an unrelated person, you must include in your
quirement for certain sales after OctoberThe fair market value of an option can be readily income the money or other property you re-
Page 10

Page 11 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
22, 2004, to comply with conflict-of-inter- transferable. You include $400 ($1,400 value so you must report $300 as wages and $700 as
est requirements. capital gain, figured as follows:when your rights first became transferable mi-
nus $1,000 purchase price) as an adjustment on• You meet the conditions described under Selling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $3,000Form 6251, line 13.Option granted at a discount, under Em- Purchase price (option price)ployee stock purchase plan, later. ($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000Employee stock purchase plan.If you sold Gain ...................... $1,000Report your ordinary income as wages on Formstock acquired by exercising an option grantedAmount reported as wages1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. under an employee stock purchase plan, deter-[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 300mine your ordinary income and your capital gain
Incentive stock options (ISOs).If you sell Amount reported as capital gainor loss as follows.
stock acquired by exercising an ISO and meet [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700Option granted at a discount.If at the timethe holding period requirement, your gain or loss
the option was granted, the option price perfrom the sale is capital gain or loss.
share was less than 100% (but not less thanRestricted PropertyIf you do not meet the holding period require-85%) of the fair market value of the share, andment and you have a gain from the sale, the gain Generally, if you receive property for your serv-you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-is ordinary income up to the amount by which ices, you must include its fair market value ining period requirement, or you die while owningthe stock’s fair market value when you exercised your income in the year you receive the prop-the share, you must include in your income asthe option exceeded the option price. Any ex- erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-compensation, the lesser of:cess gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsthe sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have• The amount, if any, by which the pricevalue, you do not include the value of the prop-any ordinary income. paid under the option was exceeded byerty in your income until it has been substantially
the fair market value of the share at thevested. (You can choose to include the value ofExample. Your employer, X Corporation, time the option was granted, or the property in your income in the year it isgranted you an ISO on March 11, 2003, to buy transferred to you, as discussed later, rather• The amount, if any, by which the price100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a than the year it is substantially vested.)paid under the option was exceeded byshare, its fair market value at the time. You Until the property becomes substantiallythe fair market value of the share at theexercised the option on January 14, 2004, when vested, it is owned by the person who makes thetime of the disposition or death.the stock was selling on the open market for $12 transfer to you, usually your employer. However,a share. On January 24, 2005, you sold theFor this purpose, if the option price was not fixedany income from the property, or the right to usestock for $15 a share. Although you held theor determinable at the time the option wasthe property, is included in your income as addi-stock for more than a year, less than 2 years hadgranted, the option price is figured as if thetional compensation in the year you receive thepassed from the time you were granted the op-option had been exercised at the time it wasincome or have the right to use the property.tion. In 2005, you must report the differencegranted. When the property becomes substantiallybetween the option price ($10) and the value of vested, you must include its fair market value,Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have athe stock when you exercised the option ($12) minus any amount you paid for it, in your incomeloss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you doas wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, for that year.not have any ordinary income.figured as follows:
Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo-Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,Selling price ($15 × 100 shares)..... $  1,500 ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 agranted you an option under its employee stockPurchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . .−1,000 share. At the time of the sale the fair marketpurchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of YGain ....................... $  5 0 0 value of the stock is $100 a share. Under theAmount reported as wages Corporation for $20 a share at a time when theterms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000]...... − 200 stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteenrisk of forfeiture (you have a good chance ofmonths later, when the value of the stock wasAmount reported as capital gain $ 300 losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14substantially vested when it is transferred, somonths after that you sold your stock for $30 aAlternative minimum tax (AMT).For the you do not include any amount in your income inshare. In the year of sale, you must report asAMT, you must treat stock acquired through the the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-yearwages the difference between the option priceexercise of an ISO as if no special treatment period, the fair market value of the stock is $200($20) and the value at the time the option wasapplied. This means that, when your rights in the a share. You must include $19,000 in your in-granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 perstock are transferable or no longer subject to a come [100 shares × ($200 fair market value −share) is capital gain, figured as follows:substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as $10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-
an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxableSelling price ($30 × 100 shares).... $  3,000taxable income the amount by which the fair to you as additional compensation during thePurchase price (option price)market value of the stock exceeds the option period the stock can be forfeited.($20 × 100 shares)............. −2,000price. Enter this adjustment on line 13 of FormGain ...................... $  1,0006251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. Substantially vested.Property is substan-Amount reported as wagesIncrease your AMT basis in any stock you ac- tially vested when:[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000]..... − 200quire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the
• It is transferable, orAmount reported as capital gain $ 800adjustment. However, no adjustment is required
if you dispose of the stock in the same year you • It is not subject to a substantial risk ofHolding period requirement not met.Ifexercise the option. forfeiture. (You do not have a goodyou do not meet the holding period requirement,chance of losing it.)See Restricted Property, later, for more infor-your ordinary income is the amount by which themation. stock’s fair market value when you exercised theTransferable property.Property is trans-option exceeded the option price. This ordinaryYour AMT basis in stock acquired ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge yourincome is not limited to your gain from the sale ofthrough an ISO is likely to differ from interest in the property to any person (other thanthe stock. Increase your basis in the stock by theyour regular tax basis. Therefore,RECORDS
the transferor), and if the person receiving youramount of this ordinary income. The differencekeep adequate records for both the AMT and interest in the property is not required to give upbetween your increased basis and the sellingregular tax so that you can figure your adjusted the property, or its value, if the substantial risk ofprice of the stock is a capital gain or loss.gain or loss. forfeiture occurs.
Example.   The facts are the same as in theExample. The facts are the same as in the Substantial risk of forfeiture.A substan-
previous example, except that you sold theprevious example. On January 18, 2005, when tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the
stock only 6 months after you exercised thethe stock was selling on the open market for $14 property transferred depend on performing (or
option. You did not hold the stock long enough,a share, your rights to the stock first became not performing) substantial services, or on a
Page 11

Page 12 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Minus: Compensation previouslycondition related to the transfer, and the possi-• Any amount that you paid for the property.
included in income from sale tobility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is• A statement that you have provided copiesspouse.................. 1 0 −60not satisfied. to the appropriate persons. Additional income $60
Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to
Dividends received on restricted stock.you as compensation for services 100 shares of Inherited property not substantially vested.its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under theDividends you receive on restricted stock areIf you inherit property not substantially vested atterms of the transfer, you must resell the stock totreated as compensation and not as dividendthe time of the decedent’s death, any incomethe corporation at $100 a share if you leave yourincome. Your employer should include theseyou receive from the property is considered in-job for any reason within 3 years from the date ofpayments on your Form W-2. If they are alsocome in respect of a decedent and is taxedtransfer. You must perform substantial servicesreported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends andaccording to the rules for restricted propertyover a period of time and you must resell theDistributions, you should list them on Schedulereceived for services. For information about in-stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-B (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),come in respect of a decedent, see Publicationless of its value) if you do not perform the serv-Interest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A559.ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to aFilers, with a statement that you have includedsubstantial risk of forfeiture. them as wages. Do not include them in the total
dividends received.Choosing to include in income for year of
transfer.You can choose to include the valueStock you chose to include in your Special Rules for
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-income. Dividends you receive on restricted
nus any amount you paid for the property) in Certain Employeesstock you chose to include in your income in the
your income for the year it is transferred. If youyear transferred are treated the same as any
make this choice, the substantial vesting rules This part of the publication deals with specialother dividends. You should receive a Form
do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia- rules for people in certain types of employment:1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-tion in value is not included in your compensa- members of the clergy, members of religiousclude the dividends in your wages on your re-tion when the property becomes substantially orders, people working for foreign employers,turn. Report them as dividends.vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when military personnel, and volunteers.
you sell the property is the amount you paid for itSale of property not substantially vested.plus the amount you included in income as com- ClergyThese rules apply to the sale or other dispositionpensation. of property that you did not choose to include inIf you are a member of the clergy, you mustIf you make this choice, you cannotyour income in the year transferred and that isinclude in your income offerings and fees yourevoke it without the consent of thenot substantially vested. receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,Internal Revenue Service. ConsentCAUTION
!
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If thewill be given only if you were under a mistake oferty in an arm’s-length transaction, include inoffering is made to the religious institution, it isfact as to the underlying transaction. your income as compensation for the year ofnot taxable to you.If you forfeit the property after you have in-sale the amount realized minus the amount youcluded its value in income, your loss is the If you are a member of a religious organiza-paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-amount you paid for the property minus any tion and you give your outside earnings to theerty in an arm’s-length transaction for otheramount you realized on the forfeiture. organization, you still must include the earningsproperty that is not substantially vested, treat thein your income. However, you may be entitled toYou cannot make this choice for anew property as if it were substituted for thea charitable contribution deduction for thenonstatutory stock option. exchanged property. amount paid to the organization. See Publica-CAUTION
!
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-tion 526. Also, see Members of Religious Or-tory stock option to a related person is not con-How to make the choice. You make the ders, later.sidered an arm’s-length transaction. Seechoice by filing a written statement with the Inter-
Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of anal Revenue Service Center where you file your Pension. A pension or retirement pay for arelated person.return. You must file this statement no later than member of the clergy usually is treated as any
If you sell the property in a transaction that is30 days after the date the property was trans- other pension or annuity. It must be reported on
not at arm’s length, include in your income asferred. A copy of the statement must be attached lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a
to your tax return for the year the property wascompensation for the year of sale the total of anyand 12b of Form 1040A.
transferred. You also must give a copy of thismoney you received and the fair market value of
statement to the person for whom you per-any substantially vested property you received
formed the services and, if someone other thanon the sale. In addition, you will have to reportHousing
you received the property, to that person.income when the original property becomes
Special rules for housing apply to members ofYou must sign the statement and indicate onsubstantially vested, as if you still held it. Report
the clergy. Under these rules, you do not includeit that you are making the choice under sectionas compensation its fair market value minus the
83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state- in your income the rental value of a home (in-total of the amount you paid for the property and
ment must contain all of the following informa- cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-the amount included in your income from the
tion. ance provided to you as part of your pay.earlier sale.
However, the exclusion cannot be more than the• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi- reasonable pay for your service. If you pay forExample. In 2002, you paid your employercation number. the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des-$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market
• A description of each property for which ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost.value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilyou are making the choice. The home or allowance must be provided as2005. In 2004, you sold the stock to your spouse
compensation for your services as an ordained,for $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. You• The date or dates on which the property
licensed, or commissioned minister. However,was transferred and the tax year for which had compensation of $10 from this transaction.
you must include the rental value of the home oryou are making the choice. In 2005, when the stock had a fair market value
the housing allowance as earnings fromof $120, it became substantially vested. For• The nature of any restrictions on the prop- self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040),2005, you must report additional compensationerty. Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to theof $60, figured as follows:
self-employment tax. For more information, see• The fair market value at the time of trans-
Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor-fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatFair market value of stock at time
mation for Members of the Clergy and Religiouswill never lapse) of each property forof substantial vesting........ $120
Workers.Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50which you are making the choice.
Page 12

Page 13 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nonmembers. Although the order reviews Employment abroad. For information on theMembers of Religious Orders
tax treatment of income earned abroad, seeGene’s budget annually, Gene controls not only
Publication 54.the details of his practice but also the means byIf you are a member of a religious order who has
which his work as a psychologist is accom-taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings
that you renounce and turn over to the orderplished. Military
depends on whether your services are per- Gene’s private practice as a psychologist
formed for the order. Payments you receive as a member of a militarydoes not make him an agent of the religious
service generally are taxed as wages except fororder. The psychological services provided byServices performed for the order.If you are retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.Gene are not the type of services that are pro-performing the services as an agent of the order Allowances generally are not taxed. For morevided by the order. The income Gene earns as ain the exercise of duties required by the order, information on the tax treatment of military al-psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.do not include in your income the amounts lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,Gene must include in his income the earningsturned over to the order. Armed Forces’ Tax Guide.from his private practice.If your order directs you to perform services
for another agency of the supervising church or Military retirement pay.If your retirementForeign Employeran associated institution, you are considered to pay is based on age or length of service, it is
be performing the services as an agent of the taxable and must be included in your income asSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 oremployer.order that you turn over to the order are not on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
included in your income. include in your income the amount of any reduc-U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen whotion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aworks in the United States for a foreign govern-Example. You are a member of a church survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenment, an international organization, a foreignorder and have taken a vow of poverty. You under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustrenounce any claims to your earnings and turn tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.include your salary in your income.over to the order any salaries or wages you For a more detailed discussion of survivorearn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderSocial security and Medicare taxes.You annuities, see Publication 575.assigns you to work in a hospital that is anare exempt from social security and MedicareDisability.If you are retired on disability,associated institution of the church. However,employee taxes if you are employed in thesee Military and Government Disability Pen-you remain under the general direction and con-United States by an international organization orsions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.trol of the order. You are considered to be ana foreign government. However, you must payagent of the order and any wages you earn atself-employment tax on your earnings from serv-Veterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-the hospital that you turn over to your order areices performed in the United States, evencome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,not included in your income. though you are not self-employed. This rule alsoregulation, or administrative practice adminis-applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingServices performed outside the order.If tered by the Department of Veterans Affairswholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-you are directed to work outside the order, your (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orernment.services are not an exercise of duties required their families are not taxable.
by the order unless they meet both of the follow- • Education, training, and subsistence al-Employees of international organizations oring requirements. lowances.foreign governments. Your compensation
• They are the kind of services that are ordi-for official services to an international organiza-• Disability compensation and pension pay-narily the duties of members of the order.tion is exempt from federal income tax if you arements for disabilities paid either to veter-not a citizen of the United States or you are a• They are part of the duties that you must ans or their families.citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you areexercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchaira citizen of the United States).order as its agent.
living.Your compensation for official services to aIf you are an employee of a third party, theforeign government is exempt from federal in-• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoservices you perform for the third party will notcome tax if all of the following are true. lost their sight or the use of their limbs.be considered directed or required of you by the
order. Amounts you receive for these services• You are not a citizen of the United States• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-
are included in your income, even if you haveor you are a citizen of the Philippines dends paid either to veterans or their ben-
taken a vow of poverty. (whether or not you are a citizen of the eficiaries, including the proceeds of a
United States). veteran’s endowment policy paid before
Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a death.• Your work is like the work done by em-religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.
ployees of the United States in foreign• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-He renounces all claims to his earnings and
countries. posit with the VA.turns over his earnings to the order.
Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed• The foreign government gives an equal • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
by the superiors of the order to get a job with aexemption to employees of the United tance program.
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-States in its country. • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of aployee of the school, and, at his request, the
member of the Armed Forces who diedschool made the salary payments directly to theWaiver of alien status.If you are an alien after September 10, 2001.order. who works for a foreign government or interna-
Because Mark is an employee of the school,tional organization and you file a waiver underRehabilitative program payments. VAhe is performing services for the school rathersection 247(b) of the Immigration and National-payments to hospital patients and resident vet-than as an agent of the order. The wages Markity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salaryerans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-earns working for the school are included in hisyou receive after the date you file the waiver istic or rehabilitative programs are not treated asincome. not exempt under this rule. However, it may benontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report theseexempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-payments as income on Form 1040, line 21.Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of acation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for morereligious order who, as a condition of member-information about treaties.ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience. Volunteers
Nonwage income. This exemption appliesAll claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene
only to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees.The tax treatment of amounts you receive as areceived permission from the order to establish
Pensions and other income do not qualify for this volunteer is covered in the following discus-a private practice as a psychologist and coun-
sions.exemption.sels members of religious orders as well as
Page 13

Page 14 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mileage reimbursements to charitable volun-Service Corps of Retired Executives Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are
teers providing relief relating to Hurricane(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-not in the business of renting personal property,
Katrina.  You can exclude from income ive services or reimbursements for out- report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.
amounts you receive as mileage reimburse- List the type and amount of the income on theof-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not in-
ments from qualified charitable organizations. dotted line next to line 21.clude these amounts in gross income.
You cannot claim a deduction or credit for
Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If youamounts you receive as a mileage reimburse-Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include in
rent personal property for profit, include yourment. your income any reimbursements you receiverental expenses in the total amount you enter onThe reimbursements must be for the use of afor transportation, meals, and other expensesForm 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount andprivate passenger automobile for the benefit ofyou have in training for, or actually providing,“PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36.the organization in providing relief related tovolunteer federal income tax counseling for theIf you do not rent personal property for profit,Hurricane Katrina during the period beginningelderly (TCE). your deductions are limited and you cannot re-on August 25, 2005, and ending on December You can deduct as a charitable contributionport a loss to offset other income. See Activity31, 2006. You must keep records of miles your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses innot for profit under Other Income in the discus-driven, time, place (or use), and purpose of thetaking part in the volunteer income tax assis-sion of Miscellaneous Income, later.mileage. The amount you can exclude from in-tance (VITA) program.come can be up to the standard business mile-
age rate. Royalties
For expenses incurred after August 24,
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,2005, and before September 1, 2005, the stan-Business and and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarydard business mileage rate is 40.5 cents per
income.mile. For expenses incurred after August 31,Investment Income   You generally report royalties in Part I of2005, and before January 1, 2006, the standard
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Incomebusiness mileage rate is 48.5 cents per mile.This section provides information on the treat-and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil,
ment of income from certain rents and royalties,gas, or mineral interest or are in business as aPeace Corps. Living allowances you receiveand from interests in partnerships and S corpo-self-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., reportas a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leaderrations. For additional information about busi-your income and expenses on Schedule C orfor housing, utilities, household supplies, food,ness and investment income, you may want toSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040).and clothing are exempt from tax. see the following publications.
Taxable allowances. The following al- Copyrights and patents. Royalties from
• Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-lowances must be included in your income and copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,
ness (For Individuals Who Use Schedulereported as wages. and similar property, or from patents on inven-
C or C-EZ). tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor your work over a specified period of time. Royal-• Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-children while you are a volunteer leader ties generally are based on the number of unitserty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes).training in the United States. sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a
• Publication 541, Partnerships. performance, or machines sold.• Living allowances designated by the Di-
rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income frompensation. These are allowances for tions of Assets. oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amountpersonal items such as domestic help, • Publication 550, Investment Income andyou receive when natural resources are ex-laundry and clothing maintenance, enter- Expenses (Including Capital Gains andtracted from your property. The royalties aretainment and recreation, transportation, Losses). based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andand other miscellaneous expenses.
are paid to you by a person or company who
• Leave allowances. leases the property from you.Income from sales at auctions, includ-
• Readjustment allowances or termination ing online auctions, may be businessDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco-
payments. These are considered received income. For more information, seenomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasCAUTION
!
by you when credited to your account.Publication 334. wells, you can recover your investment through
the depletion allowance. For information on this
subject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.
Rents From PersonalExample. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentProperty Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum-
allowance during his period of service, to be paid stances, you can treat amounts you receive
to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofIf you rent out personal property, such as equip-from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
duty. Although the allowance is not available toment or vehicles, how you report your incomements from the sale of a capital asset, rather
him until the end of his service, Gary must in-and expenses is generally determined by: than as royalty income. For information about
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-credited to his account. see Publication 544.ness, and
Sale of property interest.If you sell yourVolunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If • Whether or not the rental activity is con-complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include ducted for profit. the amount you receive is considered paymentmeal and lodging allowances paid to you in yourGenerally, if your primary purpose is income orfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyincome as wages. profit and you are involved in the rental activityincome. Under certain circumstances, the sale
with continuity and regularity, your rental activityis subject to capital gain or loss treatment onNational Senior Service Corps programs. is a business. See Publication 535, BusinessSchedule D (Form 1040). For more informationDo not include in your income amounts youExpenses, for details on deducting expenses for on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3receive for supportive services or reimburse- of Publication 544.both business and not-for-profit activities.ments for out- of-pocket expenses from the fol- If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,lowing programs. Reporting business income and expenses. or a net profit interest in a mineral property for
If you are in the business of renting personalthe life of the property, you have made a lease or• Retired Senior Volunteer Program
property, report your income and expenses ona sublease, and any cash you receive for the(RSVP).
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). Theassignment of other interests in the property is• Foster Grandparent Program. form instructions have information on how toordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
complete them.• Senior Companion Program. ance.
Page 14

Page 15 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part of future production sold.If you own through to the shareholders based on each ment in your income. See Recoveries under
mineral property but sell part of the future pro- shareholder’s pro rata share. You must reportMiscellaneous Income, later.
duction, you generally treat the money you re- your share of these items on your return. Gener-
Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are coveredceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a ally, the items passed through to you will in-
by an accident or health insurance plan throughloan from the buyer. Do not include it in yourcrease or decrease the basis of your S
a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-income or take depletion based on it. corporation stock as appropriate.
ance premiums was not included in your in-When production begins, you include all theS corporation return.An S corporation mustcome, you are not considered to have paid theproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxpremiums and you must include any benefitstion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatReturn for an S Corporation. This shows theyou receive in your income. If the amount of theamount to arrive at your taxable income from theresults of the corporation’s operations for its taxpremiums was included in your income, you areproperty. year and the items of income, losses, deduc-considered to have paid the premiums and anytions, or credits that affect the shareholders’benefits you receive are not taxable.Partnership Income individual income tax returns.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldA partnership generally is not a taxable entity. Disability Pensions
receive from the S corporation in which you areThe income, gains, losses, deductions, and
If you retired on disability, you must include ina shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Formcredits of a partnership are passed through to
income any disability pension you receive under1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Deduc-the partners based on each partner’s distributive
a plan that is paid for by your employer. Youtions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-share of these items. For more information, see
must report your taxable disability payments ascome, losses, deductions, and credits, of the SPublication 541, Partnerships.
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040Acorporation for the tax year. Retain Schedule
Partner’s distributive share.Your distribu- until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-K-1 for your records. Do not attach it to your
tive share of partnership income, gains, losses, mum retirement age generally is the age atForm 1040.
deductions, or credits generally is based on the which you can first receive a pension or annuityShareholder’s return.Your distributive sharepartnership agreement. You must report your if you are not disabled.of the items of income, losses, deductions, ordistributive share of these items on your return You may be entitled to a tax credit ifcredits of the S corporation must be shown sep-whether or not they actually are distributed to you were permanently and totally dis-arately on your Form 1040. The character ofyou. However, your distributive share of the abled when you retired. For informa-these items generally is the same as if you had
TIP
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba- tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit forrealized or incurred them personally.sis of your partnership interest at the end of the the Elderly or the Disabled.partnership year in which the losses took place. Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form Beginning on the day after you reach mini-1120S) will tell you where to reportPartnership agreement. The partnership mum retirement age, payments you receive areeach item of income on your individ-
TIP
agreement usually covers the distribution of taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theual return.profits, losses, and other items. However, if the payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or
agreement does not state how a specific item ofDistributions.Generally, S corporation dis-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more
gain or loss will be shared, or the allocationtributions are a nontaxable return of your basisinformation on pensions and annuities, see Pub-
stated in the agreement does not have substan-in the corporation stock. However, in certainlication 575.
tial economic effect, your distributive share iscases, part of the distributions may be taxable
figured according to your interest in the partner- Retirement and profit-sharing plans.If youas a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term
ship. receive payments from a retirement orcapital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri-
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-butions may be in the form of cash or property.Partnership return.Although a partnership bility retirement, do not treat the payments as aMore information.  For more information, seegenerally pays no tax, it must file an information disability pension. The payments must be re-the Instructions for Form 1120S.return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership ported as a pension or annuity.Income. This shows the result of the
partnership’s operations for its tax year and the Accrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-
items that must be passed through to the part- bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for
ners. Sickness and accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The
payment is not a disability payment. Include it inSchedule K-1 (Form 1065).You should re- Injury Benefits your income in the tax year you receive it.ceive from each partnership in which you are a
member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),Generally, you must report as income anyPartner’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,amount you receive for personal injury or sick-Military and Governmentetc., showing your share of income, deductions,ness through an accident or health plan that isDisability Pensionscredits, and tax preference items of the partner-paid for by your employer. If both you and yourship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K-1 foremployer pay for the plan, only the amount youCertain military and government disability pen-your records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.receive that is due to your employer’s paymentssions are not taxable.
is reported as income. However, certain pay-Partner’s return.You generally must report
Service-connected disability.You may bements may not be taxable to you. For informa-partnership items on your individual return the
able to exclude from income amounts you re-tion on nontaxable payments, see Military andsame way as they are reported on the partner-
ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceGovernment Disability Pensions and Othership return. That is, if the partnership had a
for personal injury or sickness resulting fromSickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus-capital gain, you report your share on Schedule
active service in one of the following govern-sion.D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-
ment services.ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Form Do not report as income any amounts
1040). paid to reimburse you for medical ex-• The armed forces of any country.
penses you incurred after the plan
TIP
Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) • The National Oceanic and Atmosphericwas established.will tell you where to report each item Administration.
of income on your individual return.
TIP
Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of• The Public Health Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any
amounts you receive from the plan for personal• The Foreign Service.S Corporation Income
injury or sickness as income on your tax return.
In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-Conditions for exclusion.Do not include
its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- penses you deducted in an earlier year, you may the disability payments in your income if any of
tions, and credits of the corporation are passed have to include some, or all, of the reimburse- the following conditions apply.
Page 15

Page 16 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-Long-Term Care1. You were entitled to receive a disability tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-Insurance Contractspayment before September 25, 1975. surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous
Income, later.)2. You were a member of a listed govern-Long-term care insurance contracts generallyUnder this limit, the excludable amount forment service or its reserve component, orare treated as accident and health insuranceany period is figured by subtracting any reim-were under a binding written commitmentcontracts. Amounts you receive from them bursement received (through insurance or oth-to become a member, on September 24, (other than policyholder dividends or premiumerwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care1975. refunds) generally are excludable from incomeservices during the period from the larger of theas amounts received for personal injury or sick-3. You receive the disability payments for a following amounts.ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madecombat-related injury. This is a personalon a per diem or other periodic basis under a• The cost of qualified long-term care serv-injury or sickness that: long-term care insurance contract, you must fileices during the period.
Form 8853 with your return.a. Results directly from armed conflict, • The dollar amount for the period ($240 perA long-term care insurance contract is anb. Takes place while you are engaged in day for any period in 2005).insurance contract that only provides coverageextra-hazardous service, for qualified long-term care services. The con-See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions
c. Takes place under conditions simulat- tract must: for more information.
ing war, including training exercises• Be guaranteed renewable,such as maneuvers, or Workers’ Compensation• Not provide for a cash surrender value ord. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.other money that can be paid, assigned,Amounts you receive as workers’ compensation
pledged, or borrowed, for an occupational sickness or injury are fully4. You would be entitled to receive disability exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’compensation from the Department of Vet-• Provide that refunds, other than refundscompensation act or a statute in the nature of aerans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-on the death of the insured or completeworkers’ compensation act. The exemption alsotion for it. Your exclusion under this surrender or cancellation of the contract,applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-condition is equal to the amount you wouldand dividends under the contract may beever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsbe entitled to receive from the VA. used only to reduce future premiums oryou receive based on your age, length of serv-increase future benefits, and ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you
Pension based on years of service.If you • Generally not pay or reimburse expensesretired because of an occupational sickness or
receive a disability pension based on years ofincurred for services or items that wouldinjury.
service, you generally must include it in yourbe reimbursed under Medicare, except If part of your workers’ compensationincome. However, if the pension qualifies for thewhere Medicare is a secondary payer or reduces your social security orexclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-the contract makes per diem or other peri- equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
cussed earlier), do not include in income the partodic payments without regard to ex- received, that part is considered social securityof your pension that you would have received ifpenses. (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andthe pension had been based on a percentage of
may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxabilitydisability. You must include the rest of your pen-Qualified long-term care services.Qualified of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-sion in your income. long-term care services are: cellaneous Income, later.
Retroactive VA determination.If you retire
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-Return to work. If you return to work afterfrom the armed services based on years of serv-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-qualifying for workers’ compensation, salaryice and are later given a retroactive service-con-
tative services, and maintenance and payments you receive for performing light dutiesnected disability rating by the VA, your
personal care services, and are taxable as wages.retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
cluded from income up to the amount of VA • Required by a chronically ill individual andDisability pension.If your disability pensiondisability benefits you would have been entitledprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre-is paid under a statute that provides benefitsto receive. You can claim a refund of any taxscribed by a licensed health care practi-only to employees with service-connected disa-paid on the excludable amount (subject to thetioner. bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.statute of limitations) by filing an amended re- That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yourturn on Form 1040X for each previous year pension, based on years of service, is taxable asChronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-during the retroactive period. pension or annuity income. If you die, the part ofdividual is one who has been certified by aIf you receive a lump-sum disability sever- your survivors’ benefit that is a continuation oflicensed health care practitioner within the previ-ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- the workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.ous 12 months as one of the following.ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance
benefit from your income. However, you must• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isOther Sicknessinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust-unable to perform at least two activities ofand Injury Benefitsment or other nondisability severance paymentdaily living without substantial assistance
you received on release from active duty, even ifdue to loss of functional capacity. Activi-In addition to disability pensions and annuities,you are later given a retroactive disability ratingties of daily living are eating, toileting,you may receive other payments for sickness orby the VA. transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-injury.nence.
Terrorist attack or military action.Do not Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive as• An individual who requires substantial su-include in your income disability payments you sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-pervision to be protected from threats toreceive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- surance Act are taxable and you must includehealth and safety due to severe cognitiverorist or military action. them in your income. However, do not includeimpairment. them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobA terrorist action is one that is directed
injury.against the United States or any of its allies
(including a multinational force in which theLimit on exclusion.The exclusion for pay-Black lung benefit payments.These pay-United States is participating). A military action ments made on a per diem or other periodicments are similar to workers’ compensation andis one that involves the armed forces of the basis under a long-term care insurance contractgenerally are not taxable.United States and is a result of actual or is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total
threatened violence or aggression against the of these payments and any accelerated deathFederal Employees’ Compensation Act
United States or any of its allies, but does not benefits made on a per diem or other periodic(FECA). Payments received under this Act for
include training exercises. basis under a life insurance contract because personal injury or sickness, including payments
Page 16

Page 17 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable. medicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art
However, you are taxed on amounts you receive not included in income. However, reimburse- she created. You must report as rental income
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45 ments of the amount paid for dietary supple- on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value
days while a claim is being decided. Report thisments (such as vitamins) that are merely of the artwork, and the artist must report as
income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or beneficial to your general health are included in income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick income. 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.
leave while a claim is being processed is taxable
Form 1099-B from barter exchange.If youand must be included in your income as wages.
exchanged property or services through a barterIf part of the payments you receive exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from BrokerMiscellaneous Incomeunder FECA reduces your social se- and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similarcurity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
statement from the barter exchange should beThis section discusses various types of income.benefits received, that part is considered social sent to you by January 31, 2006. It should showYou may have taxable income from certainsecurity (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene- the value of cash, property, services, credits, ortransactions even if no money changes hands.fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the scrip you received from exchanges during 2005.For example, you may have taxable income iftaxability of these benefits, see Other Income The IRS will also receive a copy of Form 1099-B.you lend money at a below-market interest rateunder Miscellaneous Income, later. or have a debt you owe canceled.You can deduct the amount you spend to buy Backup withholding. The income you re-
back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible ceive from bartering generally is not subject to
Barteringfor nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is regular income tax withholding. However,
a miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2% of backup withholding will apply in certain circum-Bartering is an exchange of property or services.AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buy stances to ensure that income tax is collected onYou must include in your income, at the timeback sick leave in the same year you used it, the this income.received, the fair market value of property oramount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. Do Under backup withholding, the barter ex-services you receive in bartering. If you ex-not deduct it separately. change must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofchange services with another person and youthe income if:both have agreed ahead of time as to the valueOther compensation. Many other amounts
• You do not give the barter exchange yourof the services, that value will be accepted asyou receive as compensation for sickness or
taxpayer identification number (generally afair market value unless the value can be showninjury are not taxable. These include the follow-
social security number or an employerto be otherwise.ing amounts.
identification number), or Generally, you report this income on Sched-
• Compensatory damages you receive for ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However,• The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatphysical injury or physical sickness,if the barter involves an exchange of somethingyou gave it an incorrect identification num-whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicother than services, such as in Example 4 be- ber.payments. See Court awards and dam- low, you may have to use another form or sched-
ages under Other Income, later. If you join a barter exchange, you must certifyule instead.
under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer• Benefits you receive under an accident or identification number is correct and that you areExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-health insurance policy on which either not subject to backup withholding. If you do notney who performs legal services for a client, ayou paid the premiums or your employer make this certification, backup withholding maysmall corporation. The corporation gives youpaid the premiums but you had to include begin immediately. The barter exchange willshares of its stock as payment for your services.them in your income. give you a Form W-9, Request for TaxpayerYou must include the fair market value of the
• Disability benefits you receive for loss of Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-
income or earning capacity as a result of ilar form, for you to make this certification.ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-them. The barter exchange will withhold tax only upicy. to the amount of any cash paid to you or depos-Example 2. You are a self-employed ac-• Compensation you receive for permanent ited in your account and any scrip or creditcountant. You and a house painter are membersloss or loss of use of a part or function of issued to you (and converted to cash).of a barter club. Members get in touch with eachyour body, or for your permanent disfig- If tax is withheld from your barter in-other directly and bargain for the value of theurement. This compensation must be come, the barter exchange will reportservices to be performed. In return for account-based only on the injury and not on the the amount of tax withheld on Forming services you provided, the house painter
TIP
period of your absence from work. These 1099-B, or similar statement.painted your home. You must report as yourbenefits are not taxable even if your em-
income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formployer pays for the accident and health
1040) the fair market value of the house paintingCanceled Debtsplan that provides these benefits.
services you received. The house painter must
include in income the fair market value of theGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- accounting services you provided. forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
bursement for medical care generally is not tax- must include the canceled amount in your in-
able. However, it may reduce your medical Example 3. You are self-employed and acome. You have no income from the canceled
expense deduction. If you receive reimburse-member of a barter club. The club uses creditdebt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
ment for an expense you deducted in an earlierunits as a means of exchange. It adds creditincludes any indebtedness for which you are
year, see Recoveries, later. units to your account for goods or services youliable or which attaches to property you hold.
If you receive an “advance reimbursement”provide to members, which you can use to If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the
or “loan” for future medical expenses from yourpurchase goods or services offered by othercanceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a
employer without regard to whether you sufferedmembers of the barter club. The club subtractsbusiness debt, report the amount on Schedule C
a personal injury or sickness or incurred medicalcredit units from your account when you receiveor Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedule
expenses, that amount is included in your in-goods or services from other members. YouF (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if
come, whether or not you incur uninsured medi-must include in your income the value of thethe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).
cal expenses during the year. credit units that are added to your account, even
Reimbursements received under your Form 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentthough you may not actually receive goods or
employer’s plan for expenses incurred before agency, financial institution, or credit unionservices from other members until a later tax
the plan was established are included in income. cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 oryear.
 Reimbursements received under your more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-
employer’s plan of the amount paid for nonpre-Example 4. You own a small apartment tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is
scription medicines and drugs (such as allergybuilding. In return for 6 months rent-free use of shown in box 2.
Page 17

Page 18 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest included in canceled debt.If any An educational institution is an organizationExceptions
with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-interest is forgiven and included in the amount of
There are several exceptions to the inclusion oflarly enrolled body of students in attendance atcanceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest
canceled debt in income. These are explainedthe place where the educational activities arealso will be shown in box 3. Whether or not younext. carried on.must include the interest portion of the canceled
A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-debt in your income depends on whether theDebt canceled as a result of Hurricane Ka-poration, community chest, fund, or foundationinterest would be deductible if you paid it. Seetrina.If you qualify, you can exclude from in-organized and operated exclusively for one orDeductible debt under Exceptions, later. come the amount of a canceled nonbusinessmore of the following purposes.If the interest would not be deductible (suchdebt. The debt must be canceled by an applica-• Charitable.as interest on a personal loan), include in yourble entity after August 24, 2005, and before
income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. IfJanuary 1, 2007. • Educational.
the interest would be deductible (such as on aYou qualify for this relief if your main home• Fostering national or international amateurbusiness loan), include in your income the neton August 25, 2005, was located: sports competition (but only if none of theamount of the canceled debt (the amount shown
organization’s activities involve providing• In the core disaster area, orin box 2 less the interest amount shown in box athletic facilities or equipment).3). • In the Hurricane Katrina disaster area (but
• Literary.outside the core disaster area) and you
Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial suffered economic loss that was caused • Preventing cruelty to children or animals.institution offers a discount for the early paymentby Hurricane Katrina.
• Religious.of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-For a definition of Hurricane Katrina disastercount is canceled debt. You must include the • Scientific.area and the core disaster area, see Publicationcanceled amount in your income. 4492. • Testing for public safety.
This exclusion does not apply to a canceledMortgage relief upon sale or other
Exception. You do have income if your stu-debt to the extent that real property, which wasdisposition.If you are personally liable for a dent loan was made by an educational institu-security for the debt, is located outside of themortgage (recourse debt), and you are relieved tion and is canceled because of services youHurricane Katrina disaster area.of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop- performed for the institution or other organiza-erty, you may realize gain or loss up to the fairApplicable entity.The term applicable en-tion that provided the funds.market value of the property. To the extent thetity means an executive, judicial, or legislative
mortgage discharge exceeds the fair marketagency and an applicable financial entity as de-Deductible debt. You do not have income
value of the property, it is income from dischargefined in Internal Revenue Code section from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of
6050P(c).of indebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion the debt would be deductible. This exception
applies only if you use the cash method of ac-under Excluded debt, later. Report any income
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 ofStudent loans. Certain student loans containfrom discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness
Publication 334.a provision that all or part of the debt incurred todebt that does not qualify for exclusion as other
attend the qualified educational institution will beincome on Form 1040, line 21. Education loan repayment assistance.canceled if you work for a certain period of time If you are not personally liable for a mort- Education loan repayments made to you by thein certain professions for any of a broad class ofgage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved National Health Service Corps Loan Repaymentemployers. Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) orof the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-
You do not have income if your student loana state education loan repayment program eligi-erty (such as through foreclosure or reposses-
is canceled after you agreed to this provisionble for funds under the Public Health Service Actsion), that relief is included in the amount youand then performed the services required. Toare not taxable if you agree to provide primaryrealize. You may have a taxable gain if thequalify, the loan must have been made by:health services in health professional shortageamount you realize exceeds your adjusted basis
areas. For more information, see Publicationin the property. Report any gain on nonbusiness1. The Federal Government, a state or local970.property as a capital gain. government, or an instrumentality, agency,
See Foreclosures and Repossessions in or subdivision thereof, Price reduced after purchase.Generally, if
Publication 544 for more information. the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporationfor property you purchased, you do not havethat has assumed control of a state,Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in income from the reduction. The reduction of thecounty, or municipal hospital, and whosea corporation and the corporation cancels or debt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentemployees are considered public employ-and reduces your basis in the property.forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is aees under state law, orconstructive distribution that is generally divi- Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled3. An educational institution:dend income to you. For more information, see debt in your gross income in the following situa-Publication 542, Corporations. a. Under an agreement with an entity de-tions.If you are a stockholder in a corporation andscribed in (1) or (2) that provided the• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy caseyou cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- funds to the institution to make the loan,under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-tion, you generally do not realize income. This isor cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.because the canceled debt is considered as a
b. As part of a program of the institutioncontribution to the capital of the corporation • The debt is canceled when you are insol-designed to encourage students toequal to the amount of debt principal that you vent. However, you cannot exclude anyserve in occupations or areas with un-canceled. amount of canceled debt that is more thanmet needs and under which the serv- the amount by which you are insolvent.ices provided are for or under the See Publication 908.Repayment of canceled debt.If you included direction of a governmental unit or aa canceled amount in your income and later pay tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
the debt, you may be able to file a claim for tion (defined later). celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3
refund for the year the amount was included in of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.
income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X ifA loan to refinance a qualified student loan• The debt is qualified real property busi-the statute of limitations for filing a claim is stillwill also qualify if it was made by an educationalness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationopen. The statute of limitations generally doesinstitution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-334.not end until 3 years after the due date of yourzation under its program designed as described
in (3)(b) above.original return. • The cancellation is intended as a gift.
Page 18

Page 19 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest option on insurance.If an insurance as an annuity. This is explained in PublicationHost or Hostess
company pays you interest only on proceeds 575. For this treatment to apply, you must
from life insurance left on deposit, the interest choose to receive the proceeds in installmentsIf you host a party at which sales are made, any
you are paid is taxable. before receiving any part of the lump sum. Thisgift you receive for giving the party is a payment
election must be made within 60 days after theIf your spouse died before October 23, 1986,for helping a direct seller make sales. You must
lump-sum payment first becomes payable toand you chose to receive only the interest fromreport it as income at its fair market value.
you.your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interestYour out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment
If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromexpenses. These expenses are deductible as Accelerated Death Benefitsthe policy in installments, you can take the inter-miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to
est exclusion from the time you begin to receivethe 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-the installments.but only up to the amount of income you receive efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalfor giving the party. settlement before the insured’s death are ex-Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-For more information about the 50% limit for cluded from income if the insured is terminally order a life insurance policy for cash, you mustmeal and entertainment expenses, see 50% chronically ill.include in income any proceeds that are moreLimit in Publication 463. than the cost of the life insurance policy. InViatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-general, your cost (or investment in the contract)ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeLife Insurance Proceeds is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeinsurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personLife insurance proceeds paid to you because ofrebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that werewho regularly engages in the business of buyingthe death of the insured person are not taxablenot included in your income. or taking assignment of life insurance contractsunless the policy was turned over to you for aYou should receive a Form 1099-R showingon the lives of insured individuals who are termi-price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidthe total proceeds and the taxable part. Reportnally or chronically ill and who meets the require-under an accident or health insurance policy orthese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalan endowment contract. 1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.Revenue Code.
For information on when the proceedsProceeds not received in installments.If Exclusion for terminal illness.Acceleratedare excluded from income, see Accel-death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or death benefits are fully excludable if the insurederated Death Benefits, later.
TIP
other than at regular intervals, include in your is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whoincome only the benefits that are more than the has been certified by a physician as having anSplit-dollar life insurance.Generally, aamount payable to you at the time of the insured illness or physical condition that can reasonablysplit-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-person’s death. If the benefit payable at death is be expected to result in death within 24 monthsrangement between an owner and a non-ownernot specified, you include in your income the from the date of the certification.of a life insurance contract under which eitherbenefit payments that are more than the present
party to the arrangement pays all or part of thevalue of the payments at the time of death. Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured
premiums, and one of the parties paying theis a chronically ill individual who is not terminally
premiums is entitled to recover all or part ofill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisProceeds received in installments.If you re-those premiums from the proceeds of the con-of costs incurred for qualified long-term careceive life insurance proceeds in installments,tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesservices are fully excludable. Accelerated deathyou can exclude part of each installment fromto tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.benefits paid on a per diem or other periodicyour income.
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limitTo determine the excluded part, divide the1. Under the economic benefit regime, theapplies to the total of the accelerated deathamount held by the insurance company (gener-owner of the life insurance contract isbenefits and any periodic payments receivedally the total lump sum payable at the death oftreated as providing current life insurancefrom long-term care insurance contracts. Forthe insured person) by the number of install-protection and other taxable economicinformation on the limit and the definitions ofments to be paid. Include anything over thisbenefits to the non-owner of the contract.chronically ill individual, qualified long-term careexcluded part in your income as interest.
2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofservices, and long-term care insurance con-
the life insurance contract is treated astracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-Example. The face amount of the policy is
loaning premium payments to the owner oftracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-
the contract. earlier.ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.
The excluded part of each installment is $625Only one of these regimes applies to any oneException. The exclusion does not apply to($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.policy. For more information, see sectionsany amount paid to a person (other than theThe rest of each payment, $375 a month (or1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.insured) who has an insurable interest in the life$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to of the insured because the insured:you.
• Is a director, officer, or employee of theEndowment Contract ProceedsInstallments for life.If, as the beneficiary person, orunder an insurance contract, you are entitled toAn endowment contract is a policy under whichreceive the proceeds in installments for the rest • Has a financial interest in the person’syou are paid a specified amount of money on aof your life without a refund or period-certain business.certain date unless you die before that date, inguarantee, you figure the excluded part of eachwhich case, the money is paid to your desig-installment by dividing the amount held by the Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid ininsurance company by your life expectancy. If ated death benefits made on a per diem or othera lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifthere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withthe proceeds are more than the cost of theamount held by the insurance company for this your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 topolicy. To determine your cost, subtract anypurpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the exclude accelerated death benefits paid on theamount that you previously received under theguarantee. basis of actual expenses incurred.contract and excluded from your income from
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died the total premiums (or other consideration) paid
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumRecoveries
ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourpayment that is more than your cost in your
spouse are received in installments, you canincome. A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-Endowment proceeds that you choose to ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youreceive in installments instead of a lump-sum most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
can continue to take the exclusion. payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized
Page 19

Page 20 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have report any interest you received on state or local
1. The recovery is for a tax year other thanrecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.
2004.payments on previously deducted bad debts)Recovery and expense in same year.If theand recoveries of items for which you previously 2. The recovery is for a deducted item otherrefund or other recovery and the expense occurclaimed a tax credit. than state or local income taxes, such as ain the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
general sales tax or real property tax re-duction or credit and is not reported as income.Tax benefit rule.You must include a recovery
fund.in your income in the year you receive it up to theRecovery for 2 or more years.If you receiveamount by which the deduction or credit you 3. On your 2004 Form 1040, line 41 wasa refund or other recovery that is for amountstook for the recovered amount reduced your tax more than line 40.you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustin the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered 4. You received a refund of state and localcrease to an amount carried over to the currentamount between the years in which you paid it.income taxes in 2005 that was more thanyear that resulted from the deduction or credit isThis allocation is necessary to determine thethe excess of your 2004 state and localconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-amount of recovery from any earlier years and toincome tax deduction over the amount youlier year. determine the amount, if any, of your allowablecould have deducted for your 2004 statededuction for this item for the current year.Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- and local general sales tax.
eral income taxes are not included in your in-Example. You paid 2004 estimated state 5. You made your last payment of 2004 statecome because they are never allowed as a income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.or local estimated tax in 2005.deduction from income. You made your fourth payment in January 2005.6. You owed alternative minimum tax forState tax refund.If you received a state orYou had no state income tax withheld during 2004.local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in2004. In 2005, you received a $400 tax refund
2005, you generally must include it in income ifbased on your 2004 state income tax return. You7. You could not deduct all your tax credits
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Theclaimed itemized deductions each year on yourfor 2004 because their total was more than
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-federal income tax return. the amount of tax shown on your 2004
ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2006.You must allocate the $400 refund betweenForm 1040, line 45.
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form2004 and 2005, the years in which you paid the8. You could be claimed as a dependent by1099-G. Use the worksheet in the 2005 Formtax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%someone else in 2004.1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the amount($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2004,
(if any) to include in your income. so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for9. You had to use the Itemized Deductions
For 2004 you could choose to deduct: amounts you paid in 2004 and is a recovery Worksheet in the 2004 Schedule A instruc-
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,tions because your 2004 adjusted gross• State and local income taxes, or you will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, forincome was over $142,700 ($71,350 if
• State and local general sales taxes. 2005, and attach a copy of your computation married filing separately) and both of the
showing why that amount is less than the following apply.
For 2005, the refund that you must include inamount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-
a. You could not deduct all of the amountincome is limited to the excess of the tax youceived from the state.
on the 2004 Itemized Deductions Work-chose to deduct over the tax you did not chooseThe balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
sheet, line 1.to deduct. your January 2005 estimated tax payment.
When you figure your deduction for state andb. The amount on line 8 of that 2004 work-Example 1. For 2004 you can choose an local income taxes paid during 2005, you will$11,000 state income tax deduction or a sheet would be more than the amountreduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You on line 4 of that worksheet if the amountdeduction for state and local income taxes paidchoose to deduct the state income tax. In 2005 on line 4 were reduced by 80% of theduring 2005 will include the January net amountyou receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. refund you received in 2005.of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimatedYou must include $1,000 of the refund in yourstate income taxes paid in 2005 for 2005, andincome since you could have deducted $10,000 If you also recovered an amount de-any state income tax withheld during 2005.in state sales tax. ducted as a non-itemized deduction,Deductions not itemized.If you did not item-Example 2. For 2004 you can choose an figure the amount of that recovery toCAUTION
!
ize deductions for the year for which you re-$11,500 state general sales tax deduction include in your income and add it to your ad-ceived the recovery of an expense that wasbased on actual expenses or an $11,200 state justed gross income before applying the rulesdeductible only if you itemized, do not includeincome tax deduction. You choose to deduct the explained here. See Non-Itemized Deductionany of the recovery amount in your income.general sales tax deduction. In 2005 you return Recoveries, later.
an item you had purchased and receive a $500Example. You claimed the standard deduc-sales tax refund. In 2005 you also receive a Total recovery included in income.If yoution on your 2004 federal income tax return. In$1,500 state income tax refund. You must in- recover any amount that you deducted in an2005 you received a refund of your 2004 stateclude the $500 sales tax refund in your income earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youincome tax. Do not report any of the refund assince it is less than the excess of the tax de- generally must include the full amount of theincome because you did not itemize deductionsducted ($11,500) over the tax you did not recovery in your income in the year you receivefor 2004.choose to deduct ($11,200 - $1,500 = $9,700). it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all of
Since you did not choose to deduct the state the following statements are true.
income tax, you do not include the state incomeItemized Deduction Recoveriestax refund in income. 1. Your itemized deductions exceeded the
standard deduction by at least the amountThe following discussion explains how to deter-Mortgage interest refund.If you received a of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-mine the amount to include in your income fromrefund or credit in 2005 of mortgage interest paid tions did not exceed the standard deduc-a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlierin an earlier year, the amount should be shown tion by at least the amount of the recovery,year as an itemized deduction. However, youin box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest see Standard deduction limit, later.)generally do not need to use this discussion ifStatement. Do not subtract the refund amountthe recovery is for state or local income taxesfrom the interest you paid in 2005. You may 2. You had taxable income. (If you had nopaid in 2004. Instead, use the worksheet in thehave to include it in your income under the rules taxable income, see Negative taxable in-2005 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figureexplained in the following discussions. come, later.)the amount (if any) to include in your income.
3. Your deduction for the item recoveredInterest on recovery.Interest on any of the You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet
equals or exceeds the amount recovered.amounts you recover must be reported as inter- and must use this discussion if any of the follow-
(If your deduction was less than theest income in the year received. For example, ing statements are true.
Page 20

Page 21 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount recovered, see Recovery limited tothe state and local income tax you deducted and 3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the
deduction, later.) your local general sales tax was more than amount of taxable recoveries. This is the
$400. amount you report as other income.4. Your itemized deductions were not subject
Your total recoveries are less than theto the limit on itemized deductions. (If your
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-deductions were limited, see Itemized de- Example. In 2005 you recovered $2,500 ofceeded the standard deduction ($11,000 −ductions limited, later.)
your 2004 itemized deductions, but the recov-$9,700 = $1,300), so you must include your total5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you had eries you must include in your 2005 income arerecoveries in your income for 2005. Report theunused tax credits, see Unused tax cred- only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500state and local income tax refund of $400 onits, later.) was due to your state income tax refund. YourForm 1040, line 10, and the balance of your
6. You were not subject to alternative mini- state income tax was more than your state gen-recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
mum tax. (If you were subject to alternative eral sales tax by $600. The amount you report
minimum tax, see Subject to alternative as a state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, isTotal recovery not included in income.Ifminimum tax, later.) $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × $1,500]. The balance ofone or more of the six statements listed in the
If any of the above statements is not true, the taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported aspreceding discussion is not true, you may besee Total recovery not included in income, later. other income on Form 1040, line 21.able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
your income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) areState tax refund.In addition to the previous
true (your itemized deductions were not limited,six items, you must include in your income the Standard deduction limit.You generally arefull amount of a refund of state or local income you had no unused tax credits, and you were notallowed to claim the standard deduction if you dotax or general sales tax if the excess of the taxsubject to the alternative minimum tax), you cannot itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedyou deducted over the tax you did not deduct isuse Worksheet 2 to determine the part of yourdeductions that are more than your standardmore than the refund of the tax deducted.recovery to include in your income. You can also
deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-If the refund is more than the excess, seeuse Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a state
less you are required to itemize your deduc-Total recovery not included in income, later. tax refund (discussed earlier) to include in in-
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier yearcome.Where to report.Enter your state or local return were not more than your income for thatincome tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, andAllocating the included part.If you are notyear, include in your income this year the lesserthe total of all other recoveries as other incomerequired to include all of your recoveries in yourof:on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Formincome, and you have both a state income tax
1040A or Form 1040EZ. refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,• Your recoveries, oryou must allocate the taxable recoveries be-Example. For 2004, you filed a joint return. • The amount by which your itemized de-tween the state income tax refund you report onYour taxable income was $60,000 and you were ductions exceeded the standard deduc-Form 1040, line 10, and the amount you reportnot entitled to any tax credits. Your standardas other income on Form 1040, line 21. If you dotion.deduction was $9,700, and you had itemizednot use Worksheet 2, make the allocation asdeductions of $11,000. In 2005, you received Standard deduction for earlier years.Tofollows.the following recoveries for amounts deducted determine if amounts recovered in 2005 must beon your 2004 return: 1. Divide your state income tax refund by theincluded in your income, you must know the
total of all your itemized deduction recov-standard deduction for your filing status for theMedical expenses.............. $200
eries.State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0 year the deduction was claimed. The standard
Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5 deduction tables for 2004, 2003, and 2002 are2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveriesTotal recoveries................ $925 shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need theby the percentage in (1). This is the
standard deduction amounts for years beforeamount you report as a state income taxNone of the recoveries were more than the de-
refund. 2002, see the copy of your return for that year. ductions taken for 2004. The difference between
Page 21

Page 22 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in
income on your 2005 Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If
you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2004 and a casualty loss
reimbursement from 2003, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form
1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year
(year of the deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to
zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your
recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized
Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit
1 ....................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 .................................. 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2........................................................ 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2004).................. 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2).................. 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4................................ 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction
amounts for 2004, 2003, and 2002 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.) 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable.................................. 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8........................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (for example, line 42, Form 1040 for
2004)................................................ 1 0 .
11. Amount to include in income for 2005:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).4 ............................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following
worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage......................................... A .
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040.............................. B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040.............................. C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount (for example, line 41 was more than line 40 on your 2004 Form 1040), enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter
zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see
Publication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 22

Page 23 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is ...
Single or married filing separately
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Head of household
$4,850
9,700
7,150
*DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1940, or you
are blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your
spouse if married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People 
Who Were Born Before January 2, 1940, 
or Were Blind*IF Your
Filing Status is ...
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is ...
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$6,050
7,250
10,650
11,600
12,550
13,500
5,800
6,750
7,700
8,650
8,350
9,550
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
Born before
January 2, 1940 Blind
Born before 
January 2, 1940 Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were born before January 2, 1940, or you were blind, check
the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
Born before
January 2, 1940 Blind
Born before
January 2, 1940 Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single or married filing separately,
enter $4,850
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $9,700
● Head of household, enter $7,150
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If
born after January 1, 1940, and not
blind, stop here. This is your standard
deduction. Otherwise, go on to line
7b.
a.
If born before January 2, 1940, or
blind, multiply $1,200 ($950 if
married or qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child) by the number in
the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2004.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$800
Table 2. 2004 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were born before January
2, 1940, or you are blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
than line 40 on your 2004 Form 1040 giving you your 2004 expenses. The only amount of the
a negative taxable income of $400. You must$500 reimbursement that must be included in
Example. You filed a joint return for 2004include $250 in your 2005 income, rather thanyour income for 2005 is $200—the amount ac-
with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemized$650. tually deducted.
deductions were $10,350. The standard deduc-
tion that you could have claimed was $9,700. InRecovery limited to deduction.You do not Itemized deductions limited.You were sub-2005, you recovered $2,100 of your 2004 item-include in your income any amount of your re-
ject to the limit on itemized deductions in theized deductions. None of the recoveries werecovery that is more than the amount you de-
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)more than the actual deductions for 2004. In-ducted in the earlier year. The amount you
clude $650 of the recoveries in your 2005 in- was more than a base amount. For example,include in your income is limited to the smaller
come. This is the smaller of your recoveries this amount was:of:
($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized
• The amount deducted on Schedule A • For 2004, $142,700 ($71,350 if marrieddeductions were more than the standard deduc-
(Form 1040), ortion ($10,350 − $9,700 = $650). filing separately),
• The amount recovered. • For 2003, $139,500 ($69,750 if marriedNegative taxable income.If your taxable in-
filing separately), andcome was a negative amount, reduce the recov-
Example. During 2004, you paid $1,700 forery you must otherwise include in your income • For 2002, $137,300 ($68,650 if married
medical expenses. From this amount you sub-by the negative amount. For example, line 41 filing separately).tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedwas more than line 40 on your 2004 Form 1040.
If the limit applied, your itemized deductionsgross income. Your actual medical expense de-
were reduced by the smaller of the followingduction was $200. In 2005, you received a $500Example. The facts are the same as in the
reimbursement from your medical insurance for amounts.previous example except line 41 was $400 more
Page 23

Page 24 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most
People*
IF Your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is ...
Single or Married filing separate return
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Head of household
$4,750
9,500
7,000
*DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1939, or you
are blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your
spouse if married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Who Were Born Before January 2, 1939,
or Were Blind*
IF Your
Filing Status is ...
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is ...
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,900
7,050
10,450
11,400
12,350
13,300
5,700
6,650
7,600
8,550
8,150
9,300
10,450
11,600
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming 
spouse’s exemption
Born before 
January 2, 1939 Blind
Born before
January 2, 1939 Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were born before January 2, 1939, or you were blind, check
the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming 
spouse’s exemption
Born before
January 2, 1939 Blind
Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status. 6.
● Single or Married filing separately—
$4,750
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child—
$9,500
● Head of household—$7,000
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If born after January 1, 1939, and not
blind, stop here. This is your standard
deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1939, or
blind, multiply $1,150 ($950 if married
or qualifying widow(er) with dependent
child) by the number in the box above.
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2003. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$250
Table 3. 2003 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien,
you cannot take the standard deduction even if you were
born before January 2, 1939, or you are blind.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $750
Born before
January 2, 1939
• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex- a. The standard deduction for the earlier If you had unused tax credits in the earlier
year, or year, see Unused tax credits on page 25.ceeded the base amount.
For more information on this computation,b. The amount of itemized deductions you• 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc- see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is inwould have been allowed for the earliertions other than medical and dental ex- Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.year (after taking into account the limitpenses, investment interest expense,
on itemized deductions) if you had fig-nonbusiness casualty and theft losses, Example. Eileen Martin is single. She hadured them using only the net amount ofand gambling losses. an AGI of $1,142,700 and itemized her deduc-the recovery item. The net amount istions on her federal income tax return for 2004.the amount you actually paid reducedIf the amount you recovered was deducted in She was not subject to alternative minimum taxby the recovery amount.a year in which your itemized deductions were and was not entitled to any credit against income
limited, you must include it in income up to the tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000Note. If you were required to itemize your
difference between the amount of itemized de- of state income taxes. Her state general salesdeductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)
ductions actually allowed that year and the tax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only $10,000and not step 1(a).
amount you would have been allowed (the of her state income taxes in 2004 because her2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from thegreater of your itemized deductions or your stan- otherwise allowable deductions of $40,000 wereamount of itemized deductions actually al-dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc- reduced by $30,000. In 2005, she received alowed in the earlier year after applying thetions using only the net amount of the recovery $5,000 refund of her state income taxes forlimit on itemized deductions.item. 2004.
The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov- The following shows how Eileen figured theTo determine the part of the recovery you
ery to include in your income for the year you $30,000 reduction and other amounts from themust include in income, follow the two steps
receive the recovery. If your taxable income forItemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2004below.
the earlier year was a negative amount, reduce Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. These
1. Figure the greater of: your recovery by the negative amount. amounts are needed to figure the part of the
Page 24

Page 25 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF Your Filing Status is . . .
Your Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,700
7,850
3,925
6,900
*DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1938, or you
are blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your
spouse if married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Who Were Born Before January 2, 1938,
or Were Blind*IF Your
Filing Status
is . . .
THEN Your
Standard
Deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,850
7,000
8,750
9,650
10,550
11,450
4,825
5,725
6,625
7,525
8,050
9,200
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table III, instead.
AND the Number
in the Box Above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming 
spouse’s exemption
Born before
January 2, 1938 Blind
Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were born before January 2, 1938, or you were blind, check
the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
Born before
January 2, 1938 Blind
Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,700
● Married filing separate return, enter $3,925
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, enter $7,850
● Head of household, enter $6,900
7. Standard deduction.
7a.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If
born after January 1, 1938, and not
blind, stop here. This is your standard
deduction. Otherwise, go on to line
7b.
a.
If born before January 2, 1938, or
blind, multiply $1,150 ($900 if married
or qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child) by the number in the
box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2002.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
Table 4. 2002 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2,
1938, or you are blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
$250
Born before
January 2, 1938
Born before
January 2, 1938
$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her have been $7,000. This is her otherwise allowa- year is considered to have reduced your tax in
income for 2005. ble deduction of $35,000 reduced by $28,000 the earlier year. If the recovery is for an itemized
($35,000 × 80%). By deducting the full $10,000deduction claimed in a year in which the deduc-
AGI for 2004................ $1,142,700 paid in 2004, she derived a tax benefit of $3,000tions were limited, see Itemized deductions lim-State income taxes paid in 2004 . . . $40,000($10,000 − $7,000). Therefore, only $3,000 ofited, earlier.3% reduction (amount on the $5,000 refund is included in her income forIf your tax, after application of the credits,2004 Itemized Deduction 2005. does not change, you did not have a tax benefitWorksheet, line 8),
 [($1,142,700 − $142,700) × 3%] . . . $30,000 from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryUnused tax credits.If you recover an item80% reduction not applied (amount in your income.deducted in an earlier year in which you hadon 2004 Itemized
unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierDeduction Worksheet, line 4) Example. In 2004, Jean Black filed as headyear’s tax to determine if you must include the($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000 of household and itemized her deductions. Herrecovery in your income. To do this, add the2004 deduction (amount on
taxable income was $5,260 and her tax was2004 Itemized Deduction amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s
$528. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200.Worksheet, line 10) taxable income and refigure the tax and the
($40,000 − $30,000).......... $10,000 The credit reduced her tax to zero and she hadcredits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-
Refund received in 2005 of 2004 an unused tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). Inputed tax, after application of the credits, is morestate income tax............. $5,000 2005, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemizedthan the actual tax in the earlier year, include theNet amount of 2004 state income deductions. She reduces her 2004 itemized de-recovery in your income up to the amount of thetax ($40,000 − $5,000)......... $35,000 ductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’sdeduction that reduced the tax in the earlier
tax on taxable income of $6,260. However, theIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount of year. For this purpose, any increase to a credit
child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax ofstate income tax to figure her itemized deduc- carried over to the current year that resulted
$628. Jean’s tax liability for 2004 is not changedtions for 2004, the deduction allowed would from deducting the recovered credit in the earlier
Page 25

Page 26 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
by reducing her deductions by the recovery. SheAmounts Recovered for Credits • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofdid not have a tax benefit from the recovered Columbia from the Federal UnemploymentIf you received a recovery in 2005 for an item fordeduction and does not include any of the recov- Trust Fund.which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year,ery in her income for 2005.
you must increase your 2005 tax by the amount• State unemployment insurance benefits.
of the recovery, up to the amount by which theSubject to alternative minimum tax.If you • Railroad unemployment compensationcredit reduced your tax in the earlier year. Youwere subject to the alternative minimum tax in benefits.had a recovery if there was a downward pricethe year of the deduction, you will have to re-adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for• Disability payments from a governmentcompute your tax for the earlier year to deter-which you claimed a credit. program paid as a substitute for unem-mine if the recovery must be included in yourThis rule does not apply to the investmentployment compensation. (Amounts re-income. This will require a recomputation of yourcredit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries ofceived as workers’ compensation forregular tax, as shown in the preceding example,these credits are covered by other provisions ofinjuries or illness are not unemploymentand a recomputation of your alternative mini-the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditcompensation. See Workers’ Compensa-mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does notfor Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,change your total tax, you do not include thevestment Credit, for details. earlier.)recovery in your income. However, if your total
tax increases by any amount, you received a tax • Trade readjustment allowances under theSurvivor Benefitsbenefit from the deduction and you must include Trade Act of 1974.
the recovery in your income up to the amount ofGenerally, payments made by or for an em- • Unemployment assistance under the Dis-the deduction that reduced your tax in the earlierployer because of an employee’s death must beaster Relief and Emergency Assistanceyear. included in income. The following discussionsAct.
explain the tax treatment of certain payments
made to survivors. For additional information,Governmental program. If you contributeNon-Itemized Deduction see Publication 559. to a governmental unemployment compensa-Recoveries tion program and your contributions are not de-Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum payments ductible, amounts you receive under theThis section discusses recovery of deductionsyou receive from a decedent’s employer as theprogram are not included as unemploymentsurviving spouse or beneficiary may be accruedother than those deducted on Schedule A (Form compensation until you recover your contribu-salary payments; distributions from employee1040). tions.profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonus
plans; or other items that should be treated sep-Repayment of unemployment compensa-Total recovery included in income.If you
arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment oftion. If you repaid in 2005 unemploymentrecover an amount that you deducted in an ear-
these lump-sum payments depends on the typecompensation you received in 2005, subtractlier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,
of payment. the amount you repaid from the total amount youyou must generally include the full amount of the
received and enter the difference on line 19 ofrecovery in your income in the year received.Salary or wages.Salary or wages received
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofafter the death of the employee are usually ordi-
Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourTotal recovery not included in income.If nary income to you.
entry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re-any part of the deduction you took for the recov-Qualified employee retirement plans. paid. If you repaid unemployment compensationered amount did not reduce your tax, you mayLump-sum distributions from qualified employeein 2005 that you included in your income in anbe able to exclude at least part of the recoveryretirement plans are subject to special tax treat-earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaidfrom your income. You must include the recov-ment. For information on these distributions, seeon Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, if you item-ery in your income only up to the amount of thePublication 575 (or Publication 721, Tax Guideize deductions. If the amount is more thandeduction that reduced your tax in the year ofto U.S. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you$3,000, see Repayments, later.the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) are the survivor of a federal employee or re-
Tax withholding.You can choose to havetiree).
Negative taxable income.If your taxable in- federal income tax withheld from your unem-
Public safety officer killed in the line of duty.ployment compensation. To make this choice,come was a negative amount, reduce the recov-
If you are a survivor of a public safety officer whocomplete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingery by that negative amount. For example, line
was killed in the line of duty, you may be able toRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax will41 was more than line 40 on your 2004 Formexclude from income certain amounts you re-be withheld at 10% of your payment.1040. Include this reduced recovery in your in-ceive. For this purpose, the term public safetycome. If you do not choose to have tax with-officer includes law enforcement officers,
held from your unemployment com-firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad andUnused tax credits.If you recover an item pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
ambulance crew members. For more informa-deducted in an earlier year in which you had estimated tax. For more information on esti-tion, see Publication 559.unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlier mated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding
year’s tax to determine if you must include the and Estimated Tax.Unemployment Benefitsrecovery in your income. To do this, add the
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s Supplemental unemployment benefits.The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youBenefits received from an employer-financedtaxable income and refigure the tax and thereceive depends on the type of program payingfund (to which the employees did not contribute)credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-the benefits. are not unemployment compensation. They areputed tax, after application of the credits, is more
taxable as wages and are subject to withholdingUnemployment compensation. You must in-than the actual tax in the earlier year, include the
for income tax. They may be subject to socialclude in your income all unemployment compen-recovery in your income up to the amount of the
security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-sation you receive. You should receive a Formdeduction that reduced the tax in the earlier
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits1099-G showing the amount paid to you. Gener-year. For this purpose, any increase to an
in Publication 15-A, section 5, Employer’s Sup-ally, you enter unemployment compensation onamount carried over to the current year that
plemental Tax Guide. Report these paymentsline 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, orresulted from deducting the recovered amount
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on lineline 3 of Form 1040EZ.in the earlier year is considered to have reduced
1 of Form 1040EZ.your tax in the earlier year. Types of unemployment compensation.
If your tax, after application of the credits, Repayment of benefits.You may have toUnemployment compensation generally in-
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit repay some of your supplemental unemploy-cludes any amount received under an unem-
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentployment compensation law of the United States
in your income. allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youor of a state. It includes the following benefits.
Page 26

Page 27 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in amount must be included in your income as• A disaster which results from an accident
the same year you receive them, reduce the wages. involving a common carrier, or from any
total benefits by the amount you repay. If you other event, which is determined to be cat-Alternative trade adjustment assistancerepay the benefits in a later year, you must astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury(ATAA) payments. Payments you receiveinclude the full amount of the benefits in your or his or her delegate.from a state agency under the Demonstrationincome for the year you received them. Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster isDeduct the repayment in the later year as antance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-qualified if it is determined by an applicableadjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youcluded in your income. The state must send youfederal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount youtance from the federal, state, or local govern-clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, andshould include in income. The amount should bement, agency, or instrumentality.enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on thereported on Form 1040, line 21.dotted line next to line 36. If the amount you Disaster mitigation payments.You canrepay in a later year is more than $3,000, youPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-also exclude from income any amount you re-may be able to take a credit against your tax forbility, you must include in income compensationceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-the later year instead of deducting the amountyou receive for services you perform unless thement. Like qualified disaster relief payments,repaid. For information on this, see Repay- compensation is otherwise excluded. However,qualified disaster mitigation payments are alsoments, later. you do not include in income the value of goods,most commonly paid to you in the period imme-
services, and cash that you receive, not in returndiately following damage to property as a resultPrivate unemployment fund. Unemploy- for your services, but for your training and reha-of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga-ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-tion payments are grants you use to mitigateion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute areble amounts include payments for transportation(reduce the severity of) potential damage fromtaxable only if the amounts you receive are moreand attendant care, such as interpreter servicesfuture natural disasters. They are paid to youthan your total payments into the fund. Reportfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, andthrough state and local governments based onthe taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.services to help mentally retarded persons dothe provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
their work. Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or thePayments by a union.Benefits paid to you as
National Flood Insurance Act.an unemployed member of a union from regular
Disaster relief grants. Do not include You cannot increase the basis or adjustedunion dues are included in your income on Form
post-disaster grants received under the Disasterbasis of your property for improvements made1040, line 21. However, if the unemployment
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in yourwith nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.benefits are paid from a special fund to which
income if the grant payments are made to helpIf in a previous year you filed a tax returnyou contributed, your payments to the fund are
you meet necessary expenses or serious needsreporting disaster mitigation payments as tax-not deductible, and the benefit payments are
for medical, dental, housing, personal property,able income, you should file Form 1040X toincludible in your income only to the extent they
transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-claim a refund for tax years that are not closedare more than your contributions.
duct casualty losses or medical expenses thatby the statute of limitations. The statute of limita-
are specifically reimbursed by these disasterGuaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- tions generally does not end until 3 years after
relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-ceive from your employer during periods of un- the due date of your original return.
ments under the Act are taxable unemploymentemployment, under a union agreement that
Mortgage assistance payments. Paymentscompensation. See Unemployment compensa-guarantees you full pay during the year, are
made under section 235 of the National Housingtion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of
Act for mortgage assistance are not included inForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form
Disaster relief payments.You can exclude the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the1040EZ.
from income any amount you receive that is ahomeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
State employees. Payments similar to a qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-gram cannot be deducted.
state’s unemployment compensation may be aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: 
Replacement housing payments. Replace-made by the state to its employees who are not
1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- ment housing payments made under the Uni-covered by the state’s unemployment compen-
essary personal, family, living, or funeral form Relocation Assistance and Real Propertysation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
expenses that result from a qualified disas- Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder-able, do not report them as unemployment
ter, ally Assisted Programs are not includible incompensation. Report these payments on Form
gross income, but are includible in the basis of1040, line 21. 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-the newly acquired property.essary expenses incurred for the repair or
Welfare and Other rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-Relocation payments and home rehabilita-
placement of its contents to the extent it isPublic Assistance Benefits tion grants.A relocation payment under sec-
due to a qualified disaster, tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community
Do not include in your income governmental Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orbenefit payments from a public welfare fund a displaced individual moving from a flood-dam-sale of transportation as a common carrierbased upon need, such as payments due to aged residence to another residence is not in-because of the death or personal physicalblindness. Payments from a state fund for the cludible in gross income. Home rehabilitationinjuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedvictims of crime should not be included in the grants received by low-income homeowners in adisaster, orvictims’ incomes if they are in the nature of defined area under the same act are also not
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-4. By a federal, state, or local government, orincludible in gross income.
penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youagency or instrumentality in connection
must include in your income any welfare pay- Indian financing grants.Nonreimbursablewith a qualified disaster in order to pro-
ments that are compensation for services or that grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Actmote the general welfare.
are obtained fraudulently. of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-makingYou can only exclude this amount to the extentIndian-owned economic enterprises on or nearany expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-Work-training program. Payments you re- reservations are not includible in gross income.ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applyceive from a state welfare agency for taking part
if you were a participant or conspirator in ain a work-training program are not included in Medicare. Medicare benefits received under
terrorist action or his or her representative.your income, as long as the payments (exclu- title XVIII of the Social Security Act are not
A qualified disaster is:sive of extra allowances for transportation or includible in the gross income of the individuals
other costs) do not total more than the public for whom they are paid. This includes basic (part• A disaster which results from a terrorist orwelfare benefits you would have received other- A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))military action,wise. If the payments are more than the welfare and supplementary (part B (Supplementary
benefits you would have received, the entire• A Presidentially declared disaster, or Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
Page 27

Page 28 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Old-age, survivors, and disability insuranceDepending on the transaction, the additional less you are figuring gain or loss from the casu-
benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under payment to the borrower is treated as a: alty or theft. See Publication 547, Casualties,
section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act Disasters, and Thefts, for more information.• Gift,are not includible in the gross income of the Charitable gift annuities.If you are the bene-individuals for whom they are paid. This applies• Dividend, ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance• Contribution to capital, clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentagebenefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, payment in your income.widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as• Payment of compensation, or The payer will report the types of income youwell as the lump-sum death payment. • Another type of payment. received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross dis-
tribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a, orNutrition Program for the Elderly.Food The borrower may have to report this paymenton Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed asbenefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-as income, depending on its classification.ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on Formgram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-For more information on below-market loans,1040, line 16b, or on Form 1040A, line 12b.pare and serve free meals for the program,see chapter 1 of Publication 550. Report the portion taxed as capital gain (box 3)include in your income as wages the cash pay
on Schedule D, line 8.you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodBribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your
benefits. income. Child support payments.You should not re-
port these payments on your return. See Publi-Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.Campaign contributions. These contribu- cation 504 for more information.Payments made by a state to qualified people totions are not income to a candidate unless they
reduce their cost of winter energy use are not Court awards and damages. To determine ifare diverted to his or her personal use. To be
taxable. settlement amounts you receive by compromiseexempt from tax, the contributions must be
or judgment must be included in your income,spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund
you must consider the item that the settlementfor use in future campaigns. However, interestOther Income
replaces. Include the following as ordinary in-earned on bank deposits, dividends received on
The following brief discussions are arranged in come.contributed securities, and net gains realized on
alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-sales of contributed securities are taxable and
1. Interest on any award.cussed in greater detail in another publicationmust be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-
include a reference to that publication. come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits
tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to anin most cases.Activity not for profit.You must include on office account must be included in the
3. Punitive damages. It does not matter ifyour return income from an activity from whichofficeholder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, in
they relate to a physical injury or physicalyou do not expect to make a profit. An examplethe year transferred.
sickness.of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you
Canceled sales contract.If you sell propertyoperate mostly for recreation and pleasure. 4. Amounts received in settlement of pension(such as land or a residence) under a contract,Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc- rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).but the contract is canceled and you return thetions for expenses related to the activity are
buyer’s money in the same tax year as the 5. Damages for:limited. They cannot total more than the income
original sale, you have no income from the sale.you report, and can be taken only if you itemize a. Patent or copyright infringement,If the contract is canceled and you return thedeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See
buyer’s money in a later tax year, you mustNot-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica- b. Breach of contract, or
include your gain in your income for the year oftion 535, for information on whether an activity is c. Interference with business operations.the sale. When you return the money and takeconsidered carried on for a profit.
back the property in the later year, you treat the
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-transaction as a purchase that gives you a newAlaska Permanent Fund dividend.If you re-
tress received to satisfy a claim under Titlebasis in the property equal to the funds youceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral income
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.return to the buyer.fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report
Special rules apply to the reacquisition ofit as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of 7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
real property where a secured indebtednessForm 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The gent fees) where the underlying recovery
(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Forstate of Alaska sends each recipient a document is included in gross income.
further information, see Repossession in Publi-that shows the amount of the payment with the
 Do not include in your income compensatorycation 537, Installment Sales.check. The amount is also reported to the IRS.
damages for personal physical injury or physical
Car pools. Do not include in your income sickness (whether received in a lump sum orAlimony. Include in your income on Form
amounts you receive from the passengers forinstallments).1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
driving a car in a car pool to and from work.ceive. Amounts you receive for child support are Emotional distress.Emotional distress it-These amounts are considered reimbursementnot income to you. For complete information, self is not a physical injury or physical sickness,for your expenses. However, this rule does notsee Publication 504, Divorced or Separated In- but damages you receive for emotional distressapply if you have developed car pool arrange-dividuals. due to a physical injury or sickness are treatedments into a profit-making business of transport-
as received for the physical injury or sickness.ing workers for hire.Below-market loans. A below-market loan is Do not include them in your income.a loan on which no interest is charged or onCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromIf the emotional distress is due to a personalwhich the interest is charged at a rate below thea dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isinjury that is not due to a physical injury orapplicable federal rate. If you make a not income, but you must reduce your basis bysickness (for example, unlawful discriminationbelow-market gift or demand loan, you mustthe amount of the rebate. or injury to reputation), you must include theinclude the forgone interest (at the federal rate) damages in your income, except for any dam-as interest income on your return. These loansExample. You buy a new car for $9,000 ages you receive for medical care due to thatare considered a transaction in which you, thecash and receive a $400 rebate check from theemotional distress. Emotional distress includeslender, are treated as having made: manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.physical symptoms that result from emotional
Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basis• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and
on which you figure gain or loss if you sell thenote that requires the payment of interest stomach disorders.
car, and depreciation if you use it for business.at the applicable federal rate, and Deduction for costs involved in unlawful
• An additional payment to the borrower,Casualty insurance and other discrimination suits.You may be able to de-
which the borrower transfers back to youreimbursements. You generally should not duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
as interest. report these reimbursements on your return, un- cover a judgement or settlement for a claim of
Page 28

Page 29 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
unlawful discrimination under various provisions to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), If you are not an employee and the
of federal, state, and local law listed in Internal fees for your services from the sameBeneficiary’s Share of Income, Deductions,
Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against payer total $600 or more for the year,Credits, etc.
TIP
the United States government, or a claim under you may receive a Form 1099-MISC.Current income required to be distributed.section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. Corporate director. Corporate directorIf you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustYou can claim this deduction as an adjustment fees are self-employment income. Report thesethat must distribute all of its current income, youto income on Form 1040, line 36. The following payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZmust report your share of the distributable netrules apply. (Form 1040).income, whether or not you actually received it.
• The attorney fees and court costs may be Personal representatives. All personalCurrent income not required to be distrib-paid by you or on your behalf in connec- representatives must include in their gross in-uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate ortion with the claim for unlawful discrimina- come fees paid to them from an estate. If youtrust and the fiduciary has the choice of whethertion, the claim against the United States are not in the trade or business of being anto distribute all or part of the current income, yougovernment, or the claim under section executor (for instance, you are the executor of amust report:1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. friend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on
• The deduction you are claiming cannot be Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or• All income that is required to be distributed
more than the amount of the judgement or business of being an executor, report these feesto you, whether or not it is actually distrib-
settlement you are including in income for as self-employment income on Schedule C oruted, plus
the tax year. Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not
• All other amounts actually paid or creditedincludible in income if it is waived.• The judgement or settlement to which yourto you,
attorney fees and court costs apply must Notary public.Report payments for these
up to the amount of your share of distributableoccur after October 22, 2004. services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
net income. (Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
Pre-existing agreement. If you receive self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-How to report. Treat each item of income
damages under a written binding agreement, tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)the same way that the estate or trust would treatcourt decree, or mediation award that was init. For example, if a trust’s dividend income isElection precinct official.You should re-effect (or issued on or before) September 13,distributed to you, you report the distribution asceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-1995, do not include in income any of thosedividend income on your return. The same ruleices performed as an election official or electiondamages received on account of personal inju-applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofries or sickness. Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formand capital gains.
1040EZ.Credit card insurance.Generally, if you re- The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
ceive benefits under a credit card disability oryou the type of items making up your share ofFood program payments to daycareunemployment insurance plan, the benefits arethe estate or trust income and any credits youproviders. If you operate a daycare servicetaxable to you. These plans make the minimumare allowed on your individual income tax return.and receive payments under the Child and Adultmonthly payment on your credit card account if Care Food Program administered by the Depart-Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-you cannot make the payment due to injury, ment of Agriculture that are not for your services,ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on the payments generally are not included in yourForm 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youGrantor trust.Income earned by a grantorincome. However, you must include in your in-received during the year that is more than thetrust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-come any part of the payments you do not use toamount of the premiums you paid during theciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overprovide food to individuals eligible for help underyear. the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredthe program.
property to the trust.) This rule applies if theEmployment agency fees. If you get a job Foreign currency transactions.If you haveproperty (or income from the property) put intothrough an employment agency, and the fee is a gain on a personal foreign currency transac-the trust will or may revert (be returned) to thepaid by your employer, the fee is not includible in tion because of changes in exchange rates, youyour income if you are not liable for it. However,grantor or the grantor’s spouse. do not have to include that gain in your incomeif you pay it and your employer reimburses youGenerally, a trust is a grantor trust if theunless it is more than $200. If the gain is morefor it, it is includible in your income. grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atthan $200, report it as a capital gain.
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of theEnergy conservation subsidies. You can
Foster-care providers.Payments you re-value of the transferred property.exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or avided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-
qualified foster care placement agency for pro-ties for the purchase or installation of an energyExpenses paid by another.If your personalviding care to qualified foster individuals in yourconservation measure for a dwelling unit.expenses are paid for by another person, suchhome generally are not included in your income.
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable toEnergy conservation measure. This in- However, you must include in your income pay-
you depending upon your relationship with thatcludes installations or modifications that are pri- ments received for the care of more than 5
marily designed to reduce consumption of person and the nature of the payment. But if theindividuals age 19 or older and certain
electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-payment makes up for a loss caused by thatdifficulty-of-care payments.
agement of energy demand. person, and only restores you to the position youA qualified foster individual is a person who:
were in before the loss, the payment is notDwelling unit.This includes a house, apart- 1. Is living in a foster family home, andincludible in your income.ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-
2. Was placed there by:lar property. If a building or structure contains
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustFees for services.Include all fees for your a. An agency of a state or one of its politi-be properly allocated. services in your income. Examples of these feescal subdivisions, orare amounts you receive for services you per-Estate and trust income. An estate or trust, b. A qualified foster care placementform as:unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal agency.income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate• A corporate director,or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its
• An executor, administrator, or personalincome distributed or required to be distributed Difficulty-of-care payments.These are
representative of an estate,to you. However, there is never a double tax. additional payments that are designated by the
Estates and trusts file their returns on Form payer as compensation for providing the addi-• A notary public, or1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and tional care that is required for physically, men-
• An election precinct official.Trusts, and your share of the income is reported tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
Page 29

Page 30 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
individuals. A state must determine that the ad- amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64,Illegal income.Illegal income, such as money
ditional compensation is needed, and the care as federal income tax withheld. from dealing illegal drugs, must be included in
for which the payments are made must be pro- your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on
Gifts and inheritances.Generally, propertyvided in your home. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) if
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isYou must include in your income from your self-employment activity.
not included in your income. However, if prop-difficulty-of-care payments received for more Indian fishing rights.If you are a member oferty you receive this way later produces incomethan: a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightssuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that income
• 10 qualified foster individuals under age secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofis taxable to you. If property is given to a trust
19, or Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-
in your income amounts you receive from activi-tributed to you, that income is also taxable to• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or ties related to those fishing rights. The income isyou. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theolder. not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,income from the property, that income is taxable
or employment taxes.to you.Maintaining space in home.If you are paid
to maintain space in your home for emergency Interest on frozen deposits.In general, youInherited pension or IRA.If you inherited a
foster care, you must include the payment in exclude from your income the amount of interestpension or an individual retirement arrangement
your income. earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozen(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-
if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannotited amount in your income. See Survivors andReporting taxable payments. If you re- withdraw any part of the deposit because:Beneficiaries in Publication 575, if you inheritedceive payments that you must include in your
a pension. See What If You Inherit an IRA inincome, you are in business as a foster-care • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA.provider and you are self-employed. Report the solvent, or
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ Expected inheritance.If you sell an inter-• The state where the institution is located(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessest in an expected inheritance from a living per-has placed limits on withdrawals becauseUse of Your Home (Including Use by Daycareson, include the entire amount you receive inother financial institutions in the state areProviders), to help you determine the amountgross income on Form 1040, line 21. bankrupt or insolvent.you can deduct for the use of your home.
Bequest for services.If you receive cash
Excludable amount. The amount of inter-Found property. If you find and keep propertyor other property as a bequest for services you
est you exclude from income for the year is thethat does not belong to you that has been lost orperformed while the decedent was alive, the
interest that was credited on the frozen depositabandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to youvalue is taxable compensation.
for that tax year minus the sum of:at its fair market value in the first year it is your
Historic preservation grants.Do not includeundisputed possession. 1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-in your income any payment you receive under
posit during that year, andFree tour. If you received a free tour from athe National Historic Preservation Act to pre-
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,serve a historically significant property.2. The amount that could have been with-you must include its value in your income. Re- drawn at the end of that tax year (not re-Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notport the fair market value of the tour on Form duced by any penalty for prematuredeductible from other income. A hobby is an1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or withdrawals of a time deposit).activity from which you do not expect to make abusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deduct
profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier underThe excluded part of the interest is included inyour expenses in serving as the voluntary leader
Other Income. your income in the tax year it becomes with-of the group at the group’s request. If you organ-
drawable.ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’sIf you collect stamps, coins, or othervalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form items as a hobby for recreation andInterest on qualified savings bonds.You1040). pleasure, and you sell any of themay be able to exclude from income the interestCAUTION
!
items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifGambling winnings. You must include your
However, if you sell items from your collection atyou pay qualified higher educational expensesgambling winnings in your income on Form
a loss, you cannot deduct the loss. in the same year. Qualified higher educational1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions on
expenses are those you pay for tuition and re-Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-Holocaust victims restitution.Restitution quired fees at an eligible educational institutionbling losses you had during the year, but only uppayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orfor you, your spouse, or your dependent. A qual-to the amount of your winnings. the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interestified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bondearned on the payments, including interestLotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter- issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bondearned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- must have been issued to you when you were 24counts or funds, are not taxable. You also do nottion to cash winnings, you must include in your years of age or older. For more information oninclude them in any computations in which youincome the fair market value of bonds, cars, this exclusion, see Education Savings Bondwould ordinarily add excludable income to yourhouses, and other noncash prizes. However, the Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550.adjusted gross income, such as the computationdifference between the fair market value and the
Interest on state and local governmentto determine the taxable part of social securitycost of an oil and gas lease obtained from the
obligations.This interest is usually exemptbenefits. If the payments are made in property,government through a lottery is not includible in
from federal tax. However, you must show theyour basis in the property is its fair market valueincome.
amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-when you receive it.Installment payments. Generally, if you eral income tax return. For more information,Excludable restitution payments are pay-win a state lottery prize payable in installments, see State or Local Government Obligations inments or distributions made by any country oryou must include in your gross income the an- chapter 1 of Publication 550.any other entity because of persecution of annual payments and any amounts you receiveindividual on the basis of race, religion, physicalJob interview expenses.If a prospective em-designated as interest on the unpaid install-or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Naziployer asks you to appear for an interview andments. If you sell future lottery payments for aGermany, any other Axis regime, or any othereither pays you an allowance or reimburses youlump sum, you must report the amount you re-Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetherfor your transportation and other travel ex-ceive from the sale as ordinary income (Formthe payments are made under a law or as apenses, the amount you receive generally is not1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.result of a legal action. They include compensa-taxable. You include in income only the amountForm W-2G. You may have received a tion or reparation for property losses resultingyou receive that is more than your actual ex-Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-from Nazi persecution, including proceedspenses.ing the amount of your gambling winnings and under insurance policies issued before and dur-
any tax taken out of them. Include the amount ing World War II by European insurance compa-Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be
from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include the nies. included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. If
Page 30

Page 31 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must give the pay to your employer because The prize points are taxable in the year they are The beneficiary generally does not include in
your employer continues to pay your salary income any earnings distributed from a QTP ifpaid or made available to you, rather than in the
while you serve on the jury, you can deduct the the total distribution is less than or equal toyear you redeem them for merchandise.
amount turned over to your employer as an adjusted qualified higher education expenses.Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If youadjustment to income. Include the amount you See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education,were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36. for more information.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-Enter “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dottedtistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, youRailroad retirement annuities.The followingline next to line 36. generally must include the value of the prize intypes of payments are treated as pension or
your income. However, you do not include thisKickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side annuity income and are taxable under the rules
commissions, push money, or similar paymentsprize in your income if you meet all of the follow-explained in Publication 575.
you receive in your income on Form 1040, lineing requirements.
• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
more than the social security equivalent1. You were selected without any action on1040) if from your self-employment activity.
benefit.your part to enter the contest or proceed-
Example. You sell cars and help arrange ing. • Tier 2 benefits.
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay2. You are not required to perform substantial• Vested dual benefits.back part of their commissions to you for refer-future services as a condition for receivingring customers to them. You must include thethe prize or award.kickbacks in your income. Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing
3. The prize or award is transferred by theinformation, include it in your income.Manufacturer incentive payments. You payer directly to a governmental unit ormust include as other income on Form 1040, linetax-exempt charitable organization as des-Sale of home. You may be able to exclude21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form ignated by you. The following conditionsfrom income all or part of any gain from the sale1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-apply to the transfer. or exchange of a personal residence. See Publi-ments from a manufacturer that you receive as a cation 523.salesperson. This is true whether you receivea. You cannot use the prize or award
the payment directly from the manufacturer or before it is transferred. Sale of personal items.If you sold an itemthrough your employer. you owned for personal use, such as a car,b. You should provide the designationrefrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orbefore the prize or award is presentedExample. You sell cars for an automobile silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.to prevent a disqualifying use. The des-dealership and receive incentive payments from Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-ignation should contain:the automobile manufacturer every time you sell not deduct a loss.a particular model of car. You report the incen- However, if you sold an item you held fori. The purpose of the designation bytive payments on Form 1040, line 21. investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,making a reference to section
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainMedical savings accounts (Archer MSAs and 74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.Medicare Advantage MSAs). You generally Code,
do not include in income amounts you withdraw Example. You sold a painting on an onlineii. A description of the prize or award,from your Archer MSA or Medicare Advantage auction website for $100. You bought the paint-MSA if you use the money to pay for qualified iii. The name and address of the organ-ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportmedical expenses. Generally, qualified medical ization to receive the prize or award,your $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule Dexpenses are those you can deduct on Sched- (Form 1040).iv. Your name, address, and taxpayerule A (Form 1040). For more information about identification number, andArcher MSAs or Medicare Advantage MSAs, Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate
see Publication 969. v. Your signature and the date signed.for a degree can exclude amounts received as a
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedMoving expense reimbursements. You gen- c. In the case of an unexpected presenta-scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-erally should not report these benefits on yourtion, you must return the prize or awardceive that is for:return. See Publication 521 for more informa- before using it (or spending, depositing,tion. • Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend aninvesting it, etc., in the case of money)educational institution, orand then prepare the statement as de-Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a
scribed in (b). • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz
quired for courses at the educational insti-program, beauty contest, or other event, youd. After the transfer, you should receivetution.must include it in your income. For example, iffrom the payer a written response stat-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, ing when and to whom the designatedAmounts used for room and board do not qualifyyou must report this income on Form 1040, line amounts were transferred. for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not include information on qualified scholarships and fellow-its value in your income. These rules do not apply to scholarship orship grants.Prizes and awards in goods or services mustfellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow-Payment for services.Generally, you mustbe included in your income at their fair marketships, later. include in income the part of any scholarship orvalue.
fellowship that represents payment for past,Employee awards or bonuses. Cash Qualified tuition program (QTP).A qualifiedpresent, or future teaching, research, or otherawards or bonuses given to you by your em-tuition program (also known as a 529 program)services. This applies even if all candidates for aployer for good work or suggestions generallyis a program set up to allow you to either prepay,degree must perform the services to receive themust be included in your income as wages.or contribute to an account established for pay-degree.However, certain noncash employee achieve-ing, a student’s qualified higher education ex-Do not include in income the part of anyment awards can be excluded from income. Seepenses at an eligible educational institution. Ascholarship or fellowship representing paymentBonuses and awards under Miscellaneous program can be established and maintained byfor teaching, research, or other services if youCompensation, earlier. a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state,receive the amount under the National Health
or an eligible educational institution. Service Corps Scholarship Program or thePrize points.If you are a salesperson and
The part of a distribution representing theArmed Forces Health Professions Scholarshipreceive prize points redeemable for merchan-
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notand Financial Assistance Program.dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-
included in income. This is a return of the invest-facturer to employees of dealers, you must For information about the rules that apply to
include their fair market value in your income. ment in the program. a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to
Page 31

Page 32 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
employees and their families by an educational use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any of tional union to reimburse you for expenses of
institution, see Publication 970. the following situations apply. traveling away from home to attend the conven-
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-VA payments. Allowances paid by the De- • You received a lump-sum benefit paymentpenses, even if you are reimbursed in a laterpartment of Veterans Affairs are not included in during the year that is for one or moreyear. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, youyour income. These allowances are not consid- earlier years. must include that reimbursement in your in-ered scholarship or fellowship grants. • You exclude employer-provided adoptioncome.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-
Utility rebates.If you are a customer of anare not scholarships or fellowships if you do not ings bonds.
electric utility company and you participate in thehave to use the prizes for educational purposes.• You take the foreign earned income exclu-utility’s energy conservation program, you mayYou must include these amounts in your incomesion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-receive on your monthly electric bill either:on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you useduction, the exclusion of income fromthe amounts for educational purposes. • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orcome from Puerto Rico by bona fide re-Smallpox vaccine injuries.If you are an eligi-
sidents of Puerto Rico.ble individual who receives benefits under the • A nonrefundable credit against the
Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act purchase price of the electricity.
Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-You must use the special worksheets in appen-covered countermeasure, you can exclude the able credit is not included in your income.dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxablepayment from your income (to the extent it is not
benefits and your IRA deduction if all of theallowed as a medical and dental expense de-
following conditions apply.duction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligible
individuals include health care workers, emer-• You receive social security or equivalentRepaymentsgency personnel, and first responders in a railroad retirement benefits.smallpox emergency, who have received a
If you had to repay an amount that you included• You have taxable compensation.smallpox vaccination.
in your income in an earlier year, you may be• You contribute to your IRA.Social security and equivalent railroad re- able to deduct the amount repaid from your
tirement benefits. Social security or income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if• You or your spouse is covered by a retire-equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax- the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, youment plan at work.able, must be included in the income of the may be able to take a credit against your tax for
person who has the legal right to receive the the year in which you repaid it. Generally, youHow to report. If any of your benefits are
benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax- can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Form
able, and the amount that is taxable, depends on ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in1040A to report the taxable part. You cannot use
the amount of the benefits and your other in- your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (the
come. tion.amount in box 5 of your Forms SSA-1099 and
Social security benefits include any monthlyRRB-1099) on line 20a of Form 1040 or line 14a
benefit under Title II of the Social Security Act Type of deduction.The type of deduction youof Form 1040A. Report the taxable part (from the
and any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit are allowed in the year of repayment dependslast line of the worksheet) on line 20b of Form
treated as a social security benefit. Social secur- on the type of income you included in the earlier1040 or on line 14b of Form 1040A.
ity benefits do not include any supplemental year. You generally deduct the repayment on
Stolen property.If you steal property, yousecurity income (SSI) payments. the same form or schedule on which you previ-
must report its fair market value in your incomeously reported it as income. For example, if youForm SSA-1099. If you received social se-in the year you steal it unless in the same year,reported it as self-employment income, deduct itcurity benefits during the year, you will receiveyou return it to its rightful owner. as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State- ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (FormTransporting school children.Do not in-ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductclude in your income a school board mileageyour Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifallowance for taking children to and from schoolworksheet you can use to figure whether any of you reported it as wages, unemployment com-if you are not in the business of taking children toyour benefits are taxable. pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-For an explanation of the information found it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction oning this transportation.on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915. Schedule A (Form 1040).
Form RRB-1099. If you received equivalent If you repaid social security or equivalentUnion benefits and dues.Amounts deducted
railroad retirement or special guaranty benefits railroad retirement benefits, see Publicationfrom your pay for union dues, assessments,
during the year, you will receive Form 915.contributions, or other payments to a union can-
RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-not be excluded from your income.
Repayment of $3,000 or less.If the amountment Board. You may be able to deduct some of these
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromFor an explanation of the information foundpayments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
your income in the year you repaid it. If you muston your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915.to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to your
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,If you received other railroad retirement ben-job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier. (Form 1040). For more information, get Publica-
tion 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.Joint return.If you are married and file a Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you
joint return, you and your spouse must combine repaid was more than $3,000, you can deductStrike and lockout benefits.Benefits paid
your incomes and your social security and the repayment (as explained earlier under Typeto you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,
equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig- of deduction). However, you can choose insteadincluding both cash and the fair market value of
uring whether any of your combined benefits are to take a tax credit for the year of repayment ifother property, usually are included in your in-
taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive any you included the income under a claim of right.come as compensation. You can exclude these
benefits, you must add your spouse’s income to This means that at the time you included thebenefits from your income only when the facts
yours when figuring if any of your benefits are income, it appeared that you had an unrestrictedclearly show that the union intended them as
taxable. right to it. If you qualify for this choice, figure yourgifts to you.
tax under both methods and compare the re-Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in the Reimbursed union convention expenses. sults. Use the method (deduction or credit) thatForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruction package If you are a delegate of your local union chapterresults in less tax.to determine the amount of your benefits to and you attend the annual convention of the
include in your income. Publication 915 also has international union, do not include in your in-Method 1. Figure your tax for 2005 claiming
worksheets you can use. However, you must come amounts you receive from the interna- a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
Page 32

Page 33 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, accounting method. For example, if you use an• Search publications online by topic or
enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27. accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc-keyword.
tion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga-• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)Method 2. Figure your tax for 2005 claimingtion for the repayment accrues. published in the last few years.a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
• Figure your withholding allowances usingsteps.
our Form W-4 calculator.
1. Figure your tax for 2005 without deducting • Sign up to receive local and national taxthe repaid amount. How To Get Tax Help news by email.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year • Get information on starting and operatingYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,without including in income the amount a small business.order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-you repaid in 2005. tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- Phone. Many services are available
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax showneral ways. By selecting the method that is best by phone.
on your return for the earlier year. This isfor you, you will have quick and easy access to
the credit. tax help. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to orderContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you2005 figured without the deduction (step current-year forms, instructions, and pub-have attempted to deal with an IRS problem1). lications and prior-year forms and instruc-unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- tions. You should receive your orderpayer Advocate.If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the within 10 days.amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withclaim the credit figured in (3) above on Formresents your interests and concerns within the
your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C. 1341” next to lineIRS by protecting your rights and resolving
• Solving problems. You can get70. problems that have not been fixed through nor-
face-to-face help solving tax problemsmal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
Example. For 2004 you filed a return and every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-not change the tax law or make a technical tax
reported your income on the cash method. In sistance Centers. An employee can ex-decision, they can clear up problems that re-
2005 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2004 plain IRS letters, request adjustments tosulted from previous contacts and ensure that
income under a claim of right. Your filing status your account, or help you set up a pay-your case is given a complete and impartial
in 2005 and 2004 is single. Your income and taxreview. ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-
for both years are as follows: sistance Center for an appointment. ToTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
find the number, go to
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at2004 www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
1-877-777-4778. With Income  Without Income phone book under United States Govern-
Taxable ment, Internal Revenue Service.• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer AdvocateIncome $15,000 $10,000 office in your area. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
Tax $ 1,896 $ 1,146 to TTY/TDD equipment, call• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions orTTY/TDD user.2005 to order forms and publications.
Without Deduction With Deduction • Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 andTaxable press 2 to listen to pre-recordedIncome $49,950 $44,950 For more information, see Publication 1546, messages covering various tax topics.
How To Get Help With Unresolved TaxTax $ 9,159 $ 7,909 • Refund information. If you would like toProblems (now available in Chinese, Korean, check the status of your 2005 refund, callYour tax under method 1 is $7,909. Your taxRussian, and Vietnamese, in addition to English1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-under method 2 is $8,409, figured as follows:and Spanish). mated refund information or call
Tax previously determined for 2004 $1,896 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at leastFree tax services.To find out what servicesLess: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,146 6 weeks from the date you filed your re-are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toDecrease in 2004 tax $ 750 turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxHave your 2005 tax return available be-publications and an index of tax topics. It alsoRegular tax liability for 2005....... $9,159 cause you will need to know your socialdescribes other free tax information services,Less: Decrease in 2004 tax....... − 750 security number, your filing status, andincluding tax education and assistance pro-Refigured tax for 2005 $8,409 the exact whole dollar amount of yourgrams and a list of TeleTax topics.
refund.You pay less tax using method 1, so you should Internet. You can access the IRStake a deduction for the repayment in 2005. website 24 hours a day, 7 days a Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-
week, at www.irs.gov to:Repayment rules do not apply.This discus- ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give
sion does not apply to: accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• E-file your return. Find out about com-
we use several methods to evaluate the qualitymercial tax preparation and e-file serv-• Deductions for bad debts, of our telephone services. One method is for aices available free to eligible taxpayers.
• Deductions from sales to customers, such second IRS representative to sometimes listen• Check the status of your 2005 refund.as returns and allowances, and similar in on or record telephone calls. Another is to askClick on Where’s My Refund. Be sure toitems, or some callers to complete a short survey at thewait at least 6 weeks from the date you
end of the call.filed your return (3 weeks if you filed• Deductions for legal and other expenses
electronically). Have your 2005 tax returnof contesting the repayment. Walk-in. Many products and services
available because you will need to know are available on a walk-in basis.
your social security number, your filingYear of deduction (or credit).If you use the status, and the exact whole dollarcash method, you can take the deduction (or • Products. You can walk in to many postamount of your refund.credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which you offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick• Download forms, instructions, and publi-actually make the repayment. If you use any up certain forms, instructions, and publi-cations.other accounting method, you can deduct the cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-
• Order IRS products online.repayment or claim a credit for it only for the tax cery stores, copy centers, city and county
year in which it is a proper deduction under your• Research your tax questions online. government offices, credit unions, and of-
Page 33

Page 34 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fice supply stores have a collection of States Government, Internal Revenue • Toll-free and email technical support.
Service.products available to print from a Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Infor-
CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible mation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdordersMail. You can send your order for
for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767proofs. Also, some IRS offices and librar- forms, instructions, and publications
toll free to buy the CD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5ies have the Internal Revenue Code, reg- to the address below and receive a
handling fee).ulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, andresponse within 10 business days after your
request is received.Cumulative Bulletins available for re- CD-ROM for small businesses.
search purposes. Publication 3207, The Small BusinessNational Distribution Center Resource Guide CD-ROM for 2005,• Services. You can walk in to your local P.O. Box 8903 has a new look and enhanced navigation fea-Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903 tures. This year’s CD includes:ness day for personal, face-to-face tax
CD-ROM for tax products. You can • Helpful information, such as how to pre-help. An employee can explain IRS let-
order Publication 1796, IRS Tax pare a business plan, find financing forters, request adjustments to your tax ac-
Products CD-ROM, and obtain: your business, and much more.count, or help you set up a payment plan.
• All the business tax forms, instructions,• A CD that is released twice so you haveIf you need to resolve a tax problem,
the latest products. The first release and publications needed to successfullyhave questions about how the tax law
ships in late December and the final re- manage a business.applies to your individual tax return, or
lease ships in late February. • Tax law changes for 2005.you’re more comfortable talking with
• Current-year forms, instructions, andsomeone in person, visit your local Tax- • IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, in-
publications.payer Assistance Center where you can structions, and publications by searching
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-on a keyword or topic.spread out your records and talk with an
cations.IRS representative face-to-face. No ap- • Web links to various government agen-
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andpointment is necessary, but if you prefer, cies, business associations, and IRS or-
finding aid.you can call your local Center and leave ganizations.
• Tax law frequently asked questionsa message requesting an appointment to • “Rate the Product” survey—your oppor-
(FAQs).resolve a tax account issue. A represen- tunity to suggest changes for future edi-
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-tative will call you back within 2 business tions.
sponse system.days to schedule an in-person appoint- An updated version of this CD is available each
• Fill-in, print, and save features for mostment at your convenience. To find the year in early April. You can get a free copy by
tax forms.number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting
or look in the phone book under United • Internal Revenue Bulletins. www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Page 34

Page 35 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Athletic facilities, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title Deferred compensation:
employer-provided......... 4 VII: Nonqualified plans........... 31231 property sale.......... 1 4
Back pay and damages forAutomobile (See Vehicle, Dependent care benefits..... 5401(k) plans.................. 8
emotional distressemployer-provided) Depletion allowance......... 1 4Excess contributions......... 9
under.................... 2 8Awards  (See Damages from Directors’ fees.............. 2 9403(b) plans.................. 8
Clergy....................... 1 2lawsuits;  Prizes and awards)Limit for..................... 9 Disability:
Coal ......................... 1 4Military.................... 1 3457 plans..................... 8
Colleges and universities: Pensions .................. 1 5Limit for deferrals under...... 8 B Faculty lodging.............. 6 Workers’501(c)(18)(D) plans........... 8 Baby-sitting.................. 3 Scholarships and compensation.......... 1 6Contributions................ 9Back pay, award for.......... 3 fellowships............... 3 1 Person with................ 2 7501(c)(3) organizations...... 1 8Backup withholding: Unemployment compensation,Comments on publication.... 2529 program ................ 3 1 Barter exchange paid as substitute for..... 2 6Commissions:83(b) election................ 1 2 transactions............. 1 7 Disaster mitigationAdvance .................... 3
Bankruptcy: payments ................. 2 7Commuter highwayCanceled debt not deemed to Disaster relief:vehicles.................... 7A be income............... 1 8 Disaster Relief and EmergencyCompensation:Academic health centers: Barter income............... 1 7 Assistance Act:Meals and lodging when Employee ................... 2
Below-market loans......... 2 8 Grants................... 2 7teaching and research Miscellaneous............... 3
Bequest for services........ 3 0 Unemploymentorganization.............. 6 Unemployment ............. 2 6
benefits............... 2 6Black lung benefitAccelerated death Workers’................... 1 6
Payments .................. 2 7payments ................. 1 6benefits................... 1 9 Compensatory damages ... 1 7 ,
Discounts:Bonuses ..................3 ,  3 1Accident insurance........... 4 28
Employee discounts......... 5Breach of contract:Accidental death benefits.... 5 Constructive receipt of Employee stock purchaseDamages as income........ 2 8 income ..................... 2Accrual method taxpayers... 2 plans.................... 1 1Bribes....................... 2 8Copyrights:Accrued leave payment: Mortgage loan for earlyBusiness expenses: Infringement damages...... 2 8At time of retirement or payment ................. 1 8Reimbursements ............ 3resignation................ 3 Royalties.................. 1 4Dividends:Business income.........14-15Disability retirement and.... 1 5 Corporate directors......... 2 9 Restricted stock............ 1 2Donated .................... 3 Cost-of-living allowances.... 3 Divorced taxpayers:Activity not for profit........ 2 8 Court awards: (See also Stock options exercised incidentCAdoption: Damages from lawsuits).... 2 8 to divorce................ 1 0Cafeteria plans.............. 1 5Employer assistance........ 4 Credit card Insurance....... 2 9Campaign contributions..... 2 8Advance commissions ....... 3 Credits:Campus lodging .............. 7Aircraft....................... 8 ERecoveries, refiguring ofCancellation of debt......... 1 7Airlines: unused credits.......25, 26 Educational assistance:Cancellation of salesNo-additional-cost Currency transactions, Employer-provided.......... 5contracts.................. 2 8services.................. 7 foreign.................... 2 9Scholarships and
Capital gains or losses:Valuation of flights on fellowships............... 3 1
Employee stock option plansemployer-provided Educational institutions:(ESOPs) ................. 1 1Daircraft.................... 8 Faculty lodging.............. 6Incentive stock options Damages from lawsuits..... 2 8Alaska Permanent Fund Elderly persons:(ISOs)................... 1 1dividend .................. 2 8 Back pay awards............ 3 Nutrition Program for theSale of personal Breach of contract.......... 2 8Alien status, waiver of....... 1 3 Elderly................... 2 8property................. 3 1CompensatoryAlimony ..................... 2 8 Tax Counseling for theCar (See Vehicle, damages ............17, 28 Elderly................... 1 4Alternative minimum tax (AMT): employer-provided) Emotional distress under TitleRecoveries, refiguring of.... 2 6 Election precinctCar pools ................... 2 8 VII, Civil Rights Act ofStock options.............. 1 1 officials................... 2 9Cash or deferred arrangements 1964 .................... 2 8Annuities: Elective deferrals............. 8(CODAs) ................... 8 Punitive damages.......... 2 8Charitable gift.............. 2 8 Catch-up contributions.....8 ,  9Cash rebates................ 2 8Daycare providers: (See alsoRailroad retirement......... 3 1 Excess annual additions.... 1 0
Casualty insurance: Childcare providers)......... 3Tax-sheltered............... 9 Excess contributions......... 9
Reimbursements from...... 2 8 Food program payments Excess deferrals............ 9Archer MSAs ..............4 ,  3 1
t o ....................... 2 9Catch-up contributions.....8 ,  9 Increased limit for last 3 yearsArmed forces................ 1 3
De minimis benefits........5 ,  6Charitable gift annuities..... 2 8 prior to retirement age..... 9Disability................... 1 3
Limit on..................... 8Death benefits: (See also LifeChild and Adult Care FoodDisability pensions......... 1 5
insurance)................. 1 9Reporting by employer....... 9Program:Military action as cause of
Payments to daycare Accelerated................ 1 9Emotional distressdisability injuries......... 1 6
providers................ 2 9 damages .................. 2 8Rehabilitative program Debts:
payments ................ 1 3Child support payments..... 2 8 Canceled .................. 1 7Employee achievement
Retirement pay............. 1 3 Excluded debt.............. 1 8 awards ..................... 3Childcare providers.......3 ,  2 9
Veterans’ benefits.......... 1 3 Nonrecourse debts......... 1 8Employee awards orChronic illness.............. 1 6
Armed Forces Health Recourse .................. 1 8bonuses .................. 3 1Accelerated death benefits paid
Professions Stockholder’s.............. 1 8t o ....................... 1 9 Employee
Scholarship................ 7 Deduction: compensation ...........2-12Citizens outside U.S.:
Assistance (See Tax help) Costs of discrimination Fringe benefits ............ 4 - 8Exclusion of foreign
Astronauts................... 2 suits..................... 2 8income ................... 2 Restricted property......11-12
Page 35

Page 36 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee compensation (Cont.) Food benefits: Form 1098: Stock options from
Retirement plan employers............... 1 0Daycare providers, food Mortgage interest
contributions...........8-10 program payments to..... 2 9 Wage and tax statement..... 3statement................ 2 0
Stock options...........10-11 Nutrition Program for the Form W-2G:Form 1099-B:
Elderly................... 2 8Employee discounts ......... 5 Gambling winnings......... 3 0Barter exchange
Foreign:Employee stock purchase transactions............. 1 7Form W-4V:
Currency transactions...... 2 9plans..................10, 11 Unemployment compensation,Form 1099-C:
Employment ............... 1 3 voluntary withholdingEmployer, foreign........... 1 3 Cancellation of debt........ 1 7
Governments, employees request.................. 2 6Employer-provided educational Form 1099-DIV:o f ....................... 1 3 Form W-9:assistance................. 5 Restricted stockIncome ..................... 2 Request for taxpayerEmployer-provided dividends................ 1 2Service.................... 1 5 identification number..... 1 7vehicles.................... 8 Form 1099–G:Form 1040: Foster care.................. 2 9Employment: State tax refunds........... 2 0Excess contributions to elective Foster GrandparentAbroad .................... 1 3 Form 1099-G:deferrals.................. 9 Program .................. 1 4Agency fees............... 2 9 UnemploymentRecoveries................ 2 1 Found property ............. 3 0Contracts: compensation............ 2 6UnemploymentSeverance pay for Free tax services............ 3 3Form 1099–MISC:compensation............ 2 6cancellation of.......... 3 Fringe benefits............. 4 - 8Services totaling $600 orWages from Form W-2 ...... 3Endowment proceeds ....... 1 9 Accident and healthmore .................... 2 9Form 1040, Schedule A: insurance................. 4Energy: Form 1099-MISC:Outplacement services, Adoption, employerAssistance................. 2 8 Stock options exercised incidentdeduction for.............. 3 assistance................ 4Conservation: to divorce................ 1 0Repayment of commissions Athletic facilities............. 4Subsidies................ 2 9 Form 1099-R:paid in advance........... 3 Commuter highwayUtility rebates............ 3 2 Charitable gift annuities..... 2 8Form 1040, Schedule B: vehicles.................. 7Estate income............... 2 9 Excess annual additions.... 1 0Restricted stock De minimis benefits.......5 ,  6Estimated tax: Excess contributiondividends................ 1 2 Dependent care benefits..... 5Unemployment amounts ................. 1 0Form 1040, Schedule C: Educational assistance...... 5compensation............ 2 6 Excess deferral amounts..... 9Bartering................... 1 7 Employee discounts......... 5Excess: Childcare providers to Surrender of life insurance Faculty lodging.............. 6Annual additions........... 1 0 u s e....................... 3 policy for cash........... 1 9 Financial counseling fees.... 5Contributions................ 9 Personal property rental, Form 1120-POL: Holiday gifts................. 5Deferrals.................... 9 reporting income from.... 1 4 Political organizations...... 2 8 Meals and lodging........... 6Expected inheritance........ 3 0 Royalties.................. 1 4Form 1120S: Moving expenses (See MovingExpenses paid by Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ: S corporation return........ 1 5 expenses)another ................... 2 9Bartering................... 1 7 No-additional-costForm 1120S, Schedule K-1:Childcare providers to services.................. 7Shareholder’s share of income,u s e....................... 3 Parking..................... 7credits, deductions,F Personal property rental, Retirement planning (Seeetc....................... 1 5Faculty lodging.............. 6 reporting income from.... 1 4 Retirement planning services)Form 2441:Fair market value (FMV)...... 8 Royalties.................. 1 4 Transit pass................. 7Child and dependent careStock options.............. 1 0Form 1040, Schedule D: Tuition reduction............ 7expenses ................. 5Farming: Stock options reported Valuation of.............7-8, 8Form 4255:Qualified farm debt, cancellationo n....................... 1 0 Working conditionRecapture of investmento f ....................... 1 8Form 1040, Schedule E: benefits................... 7credit.................... 2 6Federal employees: Partner’s return............ 1 5 Frozen deposits:Form 6251:Accrued leave payment...... 3 Royalties.................. 1 4 Interest on................. 3 0Alternative minimum tax.... 1 1Compensation Act (FECA) Form 1040A:
Form 8839:payments ................ 1 6 Recoveries................ 2 1
Adoption assistance......... 4Cost-of-living allowances.... 3 GUnemployment
Disability pensions......... 1 5 Form 8853:compensation............ 2 6 Gambling winnings and
Thrift Savings Plan for....... 8 Accelerated deathWages from Form W-2 ...... 3 losses..................... 3 0
Federal income tax: benefits.................. 1 9Form 1040A, Schedule 1: Gas:
Refunds ................... 2 0 Archer MSAs and long-termRestricted stock Royalties from............. 1 4
care insuranceFees for services............ 2 9 dividends................ 1 2 Gifts........................ 3 0
contracts................. 4Financial counseling fees.... 5 Form 1040A, Schedule 2: Holiday gifts from
Form RRB-1099:Fellowships................. 3 1Child and dependent care employer ................. 5
Railroad retirement boardexpenses ................. 5FICA withholding: Government employees  (See
payments ................ 3 2Foreign employers, U.S. Form 1040EZ: Federal employees;  State
citizens working for in Form SSA-1099:Recoveries................ 2 1 employees)
U.S...................... 1 3Unemployment Social security benefit Grantor trusts............... 2 9
Paid by employer............ 4 compensation............ 2 6 statement................ 3 2Group-term life insurance:
Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3Fiduciaries: Form W-2: Worksheets...............5 ,  6
Fees for services........... 2 9Form 1041: 501(c)(18)(D)
Estates and trusts.......... 2 9 contributions.............. 9Financial counseling fees: (See
also Retirement planning HForm 1041, Schedule K-1: Accrued leave payment at time
services).................... 5 Beneficiary’s share of income, of retirement or Health:
deductions, credits, resignation ................ 3Fitness programs: Flexible spending
etc....................... 2 9Back pay awards............ 3Employer-provided.......... 4 arrangement.............. 4
Insurance................... 4Form 1065: Bonuses or awards.......... 3Flights:
ReimbursementPartnership return.......... 1 5 Elective deferrals, reporting byEmployer-provided
arrangement.............. 4employer ................. 9aircraft.................... 8Form 1065, Schedule K-1:
Savings account............ 4No-additional-cost Partner’s share of Fringe benefits reported
Help (See Tax help)services.................. 7 income .................. 1 5 o n........................ 4
Page 36

Page 37 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Highly compensated Investment counseling fees: Medicare: Pensions:
employees: (See also Retirement planning Advantage MSAs ........... 3 1 Clergy..................... 1 2
Excess contributions to elective services).................... 5 Benefits................... 2 7Disability pensions......... 1 5
deferrals.................. 9 Tax paid by employer........ 4 Inherited pensions.......... 3 0Investment income......14, 15
Military.................... 1 3Historic preservation Medicare tax  (See Social securityIRAs (See Individual retirement
grants..................... 3 0 and Medicare taxes) Personal property:arrangements (IRAs))
Rental income andHobby losses ............... 3 0 Military (See Armed forces)Iron ore..................... 1 4
expense ................. 1 4Holiday gifts................. 5 Minerals:Itemized deductions: Sale of..................... 3 1Royalties from............. 1 4Holocaust victims Limited.................... 2 3
Personal representatives (Seerestitution................. 3 0Recoveries............19, 20 Miscellaneous:
Fiduciaries)Compensation .............. 3Home, sale of............... 3 1
Prepaid income .............. 2Income .................... 1 7Host or hostess............. 1 9J Price reduced afterMissing children, photographsHotels: Job interview expenses..... 3 0 purchase .................. 1 8of .......................... 2No-additional-cost
Joint returns: Prizes and awards.........3 ,  3 1More information (See Tax help)services.................. 7
Social security benefits or Achievement awards........ 3Mortgage:Housing (See Lodging) railroad retirement Employee awards orAssistance payment........ 2 7
payments ................ 3 2 bonuses ................. 3 1Discounted loan............ 1 8
I Length-of-service awards.... 3Jury duty pay............... 3 0 Interest refund............. 2 0
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarIllegal income............... 3 0 Relief...................... 1 8
prizes................... 3 1Important changes and Motor vehicle,K Safety achievement......... 3reminders: employer-provided......... 8 Scholarship prizes.......... 3 2Kickbacks ................... 3 1Astronauts.................. 2 Moving expenses: Profit-sharing plan.......... 1 5Elective deferrals............ 2 Reimbursements .........3 ,  3 1
Foreign income, reporting Public assistanceMSAs (Medical savingsLo f ........................ 2 benefits................... 2 7accounts) ................. 3 1Labor unions:Terrorist attacks, assistance or Public Health Service........ 1 5
Convention expenses,payments due to.......... 2 Public safety officers killed inNreimbursed.............. 3 2Incentive stock options line of duty................ 2 6Dues ...................... 3 2National Health Service Corps(ISOs).................10, 11 Public transportation passes,Strike and lockout Scholarship Program ...... 7Income: employer-provided......... 7benefits.................. 3 2National Oceanic andAssigned ................... 2 Publications (See Tax help)Unemployment benefits paid AtmosphericBusiness and Pulitzer prize................ 3 1from..................... 2 7Administration............ 1 5investment...........14, 15 Punitive damages........... 2 8Last day of tax year, income National Senior ServiceConstructive receipt of....... 2
received on................ 2 Corps ..................... 1 4Estate and trust............ 2 9
Leave (See Accrued leaveForeign employers......... 1 3 No-additional-cost Qpayment)Illegal...................... 3 0 services.................... 7Qualified tuition programMiscellaneous.............. 1 7Length-of-service awards.... 3 No-fault car insurance: (QTP) ..................... 3 1Other...................... 2 8Life insurance: Disability benefits under.... 1 7
Partnership................ 1 5 Proceeds .................. 1 9Nobel prize.................. 3 1
Prepaid..................... 2 RSurrender of policy for Nonrecourse debt........... 1 8S corporation.............. 1 5 cash..................... 1 9 Raffles...................... 3 0Nonstatutory stockIndian fishing rights......... 3 0Loans: (See also Railroads:options ................... 1 0
Individual retirement Mortgage) ................. 1 8 Retirement annuities........ 3 1Nontaxable income........... 2arrangements (IRAs): Below-market.............. 2 8 Retirement benefits......... 3 2Not-for-profit activities...... 2 8Deduction.................. 3 2Student.................... 1 8 Sick pay................... 1 6Notary fees.................. 2 9Inherited IRA............... 3 0 Unemployment compensationLockout benefits............ 3 2Notes received forInheritance.................. 3 0 benefits.................. 2 6Lodging: services.................... 3I R A........................ 3 0 Real estate:Campus lodging............. 7Nutrition Program for theProperty not substantially Qualified real property businessClergy..................... 1 2Elderly.................... 2 8vested................... 1 2 debt, cancellation of...... 1 8Employer-paid or
Injury benefits............15-17 reimbursed............... 6 Rebates:
Faculty lodging.............. 6OInsurance: Cash ...................... 2 8
Replacement housingCredit card................. 2 9 Utility...................... 3 2Oil:
payments ................ 2 7Health...................... 4 Royalties from............. 1 4Recovery of amounts
Life (See Life insurance) Long-term care previously deducted...... 1 9Old-age, survivors, and
Long-term care (See Long-term insurance ...............4 ,  1 6 Itemized deductions....19, 20disability insurance benefits
care insurance) Non-itemizedLotteries and raffles......... 3 0 (OASDI) ................... 2 8
Interest: deductions............... 2 6Lump-sum distributions: Options, stock..........10, 11
Canceled debt including.... 1 8 Unused tax credits, refiguringSurvivor benefits........... 2 6Outplacement services....... 3
Frozen deposits............ 3 0 o f ...................25, 26Overseas work ............... 2Mortgage refunds.......... 2 0 Worksheet of itemized
Option on insurance........ 1 9M deductions............... 2 1
PRecovery amounts......... 2 0Manufacturer incentive Refunds:
Savings bond.............. 3 0 Parking fees:payments ................. 3 1 Federal income tax......... 2 0
State and local government Employer-paid or Mortgage interest.......... 2 0Meals:
obligations............... 3 0 reimbursed............... 7 State tax................... 2 0Employer-paid or
Interference with business Partner and partnershipreimbursed............... 6 Rehabilitative program
operations: income .................... 1 5Nutrition Program for the payments ................. 1 3
Damages as income........ 2 8 Elderly................... 2 8Patents: Reimbursements:
International organizations, Infringement damages...... 2 8Medical: Business expenses.......... 3
employees of ............. 1 3 Royalties.................. 1 4Care reimbursements....... 1 7 Casualty losses............ 2 8
Interview expenses.......... 3 0 Savings accounts.......... 3 1Peace Corps ................ 1 4 Meals and lodging........... 6
Page 37

Page 38 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursements: (Cont.) Service Corps of Retired TU
Medical expenses.......... 1 7 Executives (SCORE) ...... 1 4Tables and figures: Unemployment
Moving expenses........3 ,  3 1Severance pay ............... 3 Group-term life insurance compensation ............. 2 6
Related party transactions: Outplacement services...... 3 (Table 1)................. 6Unions (See Labor unions)
Stock option transfer........ 1 0 Standard deduction (TablesSick pay...................... 3 Unlawful discrimination suits:
2-4)..................... 2 3Religious order Sickness and injury Deduction for costs......... 2 8
members .................. 1 3 Tax benefit rule............. 2 0benefits...............15, 17
Rental income and expenses: Tax Counseling for theSIMPLE plans ................ 8 VPersonal property rental.... 1 4 Elderly.................... 1 4Limit for deferrals under...... 8 VA payments ................ 3 2Reporting of................ 1 4 Tax help..................... 3 3Smallpox vaccine Valuation:Repayments ..............32-33 injuries.................... 3 2Tax-sheltered annuity plans Fringe benefits............7 ,  8Repossession ............... 2 8 (403(b) plans).............. 8Social security and Medicare Stock options.............. 1 0Limit for..................... 9Restricted property......11, 12 taxes: Vehicle:Foreign employers, U.S. Taxpayer Advocate.......... 3 3Retired Senior Volunteer Commuter highway.......... 7citizens working for inProgram (RSVP) ........... 1 4 Terminal illness............. 1 9 Employer-provided.......... 8U.S...................... 1 3Retirement planning Terrorist attacks: Veterans’ benefits........... 1 3Paid by employer............ 4services..................5 ,  7 Disability payments for injuriesDisability compensation..... 1 6Social security benefits..... 3 2 from..................... 1 6Retirement plans: (See also Viatical settlements......... 1 9Standard deduction: Victims of, tax relief.......... 2Pensions).................. 1 3 Volunteer work.............. 1 3Recoveries and............ 2 1Contributions.............8 ,  1 0 Thrift Savings Plan........... 8 Tax counseling (VolunteerTables (2004-2002)...... 2 3Elective deferrals (See Elective Title VII, Civil Rights Act of Income Tax Assistancedeferrals) State employees: 1964: Program) ................ 1 4Unemployment benefits paidRewards .................... 3 1 Back pay and damages for Volunteers in Service tot o ....................... 2 7emotional distressRoyalties.................... 1 4 America (VISTA).......... 1 4State or local governments: under.................... 2 8
Interest on obligations of.... 3 0 Tour guides, free toursS WState or local taxes: for ........................ 3 0S corporations.............. 1 5 W-2 form (See Form W-2)Refunds ................... 2 0Trade Act of 1974:Safety achievement Welfare benefits............. 2 7Stock appreciation rights..... 4 Trade readjustment allowancesawards ..................... 3 under.................... 2 6Winter energy payments.... 2 8Stock options...........10, 11Salary reduction simplified Transferable property....... 1 1Withholding:Stockholder debts........... 1 8employee pension plans (See Barter exchangeTransit passes............... 7Stolen property............. 3 2SARSEPs) transactions............. 1 7Travel agencies:Strike benefits............... 3 2Sale of home................ 3 1 UnemploymentFree tour to organizer of groupStudent loans:Sales contracts: compensation............ 2 6of tourists................ 3 0Cancellation of debt........ 1 8Cancellation of............. 2 8 Work-training programs..... 2 7Travel and transportationSubstantial risk ofSARSEPs .................... 8 Workers’ compensation..... 1 6expenses:forfeiture.................. 1 1Excess contributions......... 9 Free tours from travel Working conditionSubstantially vestedSavings bonds .............. 3 0 agencies ................ 3 0 benefits.................... 7property................... 1 1Savings incentive match plans Fringe benefits.............. 7Worksheets:Suggestions forfor employees (See SIMPLE Reimbursements ............ 3 Group-term life insurancepublication................. 2plans) School children, transporting (Worksheet 1)...........5 ,  6Supplemental security incomeScholarships and o f ....................... 3 2Recoveries of itemized(SSI) payments............ 3 2fellowships................ 3 1 Trusts: deductions (WorksheetSupplemental unemploymentSelf-employed persons: Grantor trusts.............. 2 9 2 ) ....................... 2 1benefits................... 2 6U.S. citizens working for foreign Income .................... 2 9Surviving spouse: ■employers in U.S. treated TTY/TDD information........ 3 3Life insurance proceeds paida s....................... 1 3 Tuition program, qualifiedt o ....................... 1 9Senior Companion (QTP) ..................... 3 1Survivor benefits............ 2 6Program .................. 1 4 Tuition reduction............. 7
Page 38

Page 39 of 39 of Publication 525 11:39 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2006
Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Page 39