Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P501.SGM (19-Oct-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\d81db\documents\Epicfiles\Epicfiles\2004 files\P501 new.SGM
Page 1 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U Contents
What’s New for 2004............... 1Department
of the
Exemptions, What’s New for 2005............... 1Treasury
Internal Reminders ...................... 2
Revenue Standard
Service Introduction..................... 2
Who Must File ................... 2Deduction,
Who Should File ................. 4
and Filing Filing Status.................... 4
Exemptions ..................... 9
Information
Standard Deduction............... 18
2004 Standard Deduction Tables.... 19
For use in preparing How To Get Tax Help.............. 20
Index.......................... 222004 Returns
What’s New for 2004
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$3,050 in 2003 to $3,100 in 2004.
Exemption phaseout. You lose all or part of
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted
gross income is above a certain amount. The
amount at which this phaseout begins depends
on your filing status. For 2004, the phaseout
begins at $107,025 for married persons filing
separately; $142,700 for single individuals;
$178,350 for heads of household; and $214,050
for married persons filing jointly or qualifying
widow(er)s. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Standard deduction.The standard deduction
for most taxpayers who do not itemize deduc-
tions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is higher in
2004 than it was in 2003. The amount depends
on your filing status. The 2004 Standard Deduc-
tion Tables are shown near the end of this publi-
cation as Tables 5, 6, and 7.
Itemized deductions.Some of your itemized
deductions may be limited if your adjusted gross
income is more than $142,700 ($71,350 if you
are married filing separately). See Who Should
Itemize, later.
Get forms and other information What’s New for 2005faster and easier by:
Exemption for dependent. Beginning in
Internet • www.irs.gov 2005, you will use new rules to determine
whether you can claim an exemption for a de-
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) pendent. For details, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2004 Tax Changes.

Page 2 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Head of household filing status.Beginning little or no gross income, reading this section willComments and suggestions. We welcome
help you decide if you have to file a return.your comments about this publication and yourin 2005, you will use new rules to determine
suggestions for future editions.whether someone is your qualifying person so The second section is about who should file
a return. Reading this section will help you de-you can claim head of household filing status. You can write to us at the following address:
cide if you should file a return, even if you are notSee Publication 553 for more information.
required to do so. Internal Revenue Service
The third section helps you determine whichIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
filing status to use. Filing status is important inSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
determining whether you must file a return, your1111 Constitution Ave. NWReminders
standard deduction, and your tax rate. It alsoWashington, DC 20224
helps determine what credits you may be enti-Election to report child’s unearned incometled to.on parent’s return. You may be able to in- We respond to many letters by telephone.The fourth section discusses exemptions,clude your child’s interest and dividend income Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-which reduce your taxable income. The discus-on your tax return by using Form 8814, Parents’ clude your daytime phone number, including thesions include the social security number require-Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- area code, in your correspondence.ment for dependents, the rules for multiple
dends. If you choose to do this, your child will notsupport agreements, and the rules for divorced You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
have to file a return. or separated parents. asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-The fifth section gives the rules and dollarPhotographs of missing children.The Inter- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-amounts for the standard deduction — a benefitnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the ally to each email, we do appreciate yourfor taxpayers who do not itemize their deduc-National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-tions. This section also discusses the standard feedback and will consider your comments asdren. Photographs of missing children selecteddeduction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65we revise our tax products.by the Center may appear in this publication onor older, and special rules for dependents. InTax questions. If you have a tax question,pages that would otherwise be blank. You canaddition, this section should help you decidevisit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Wehelp bring these children home by looking at thewhether you would be better off taking the stan-cannot answer tax questions at either of thephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST dard deduction or itemizing your deductions.addresses listed above.(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. The last section explains how to get tax help
Ordering forms and publications. Visitfrom the IRS.
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andThis publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write todent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for
Introduction one of the three addresses shown under How Tothe entire year, you must follow the same tax
Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules toThis publication discusses some tax rules thatdetermine if you are a resident or nonresidentaffect every person who may have to file a fed-alien are discussed in chapter 1 of PublicationUseful Itemseral income tax return. It answers some basic519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. You may want to see:questions: who must file; who should file; what
filing status to use; how many exemptions toNonresident aliens.If you were a nonresi- Publicationclaim; and the amount of the standard deduc-dent alien at any time during the year, the rules
tion. ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andand tax forms that apply to you may be different
AdministratorsThe first section of this publication explainsfrom those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-
who must file an income tax return. If you havecation 519. ❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Table 1. 2004 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
Form (and Instructions)
THEN file a return
❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual Incomeif your gross Tax ReturnAND at the end of 2004 you income was at
IF your filing status is... were...* least...** ❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representativeunder 65  $ 7,950single
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for
65 or older $ 9,150 Child of Divorced or Separated
Parentsunder 65 $10,250head of household
❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s65 or older $11,450 Interest and Dividends
under 65 (both spouses) $15,900married, filing jointly***
65 or older (one spouse) $16,850
65 or older (both spouses) $17,800 Who Must File
married, filing separately any age  $ 3,100 If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you
must file a federal income tax return dependsunder 65 $12,800qualifying widow(er) with
upon your gross income, your filing status, yourdependent child 65 or older $13,750 age, and whether you are a dependent. For
details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You also must
*  If you were born before January 2, 1940, you are considered to be 65 or older at the end of 2004.file if one of the situations described in Table 3
**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and applies. The filing requirements apply even if
services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the Unitedyou owe no tax.States (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless
 You may have to pay a penalty if you areyou are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during
2004. required to file a return but fail to. If you willfully
*** If you didn’t live with your spouse at the end of 2004 (or on the date your spouse died) andfail to file a return, you may be subject to criminal
your gross income was at least $3,100, you must file a return regardless of your age. prosecution.
Page 2

Page 3 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property states, see Community property statesTable 2. 2004 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
under Married Filing Separately, later.See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
Self-employed persons. If you are
self-employed in a business that provides serv-If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see
ices (where products are not a factor), yourif you must file a return.
gross income from that business is the grossIn this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, andreceipts. If you are self-employed in a businesscapital gain distributions. Earned income includes wages, tips, and taxableinvolving manufacturing, merchandising, or min-scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearned anding, your gross income from that business is theearned income. total sales minus the cost of goods sold. To this
Caution:If your gross income was $3,100 or more, you usually cannot be claimedfigure, you add any income from investments
as a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under age 24.and from incidental or outside operations or
For details, see Gross Income Test under Dependency Tests. sources.
You must file Form 1040 if you owe any
self-employment tax.Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
TIP
1. Your unearned income was more than $800.
2. Your earned income was more than $4,850. Filing status.Your filing status generally de-
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of — pends on whether you are single or married. In
some cases, it depends on other factors as well.a. $800, or Whether you are single or married is determined
b. Your earned income (up to $4,600) plus $250. as of the last day of your tax year, which is
December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status is
discussed in detail later in this publication.
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must1. Your unearned income was more than $2,000 ($3,200 if 65 or older and
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the endblind). of your tax year. For 2004, you are 65 or older if2. Your earned income was more than $6,050 ($7,250 if 65 or older and you were born before January 2, 1940.blind).
3. Your gross income was more than $1,200 ($2,400 if 65 or older and Filing Requirementsblind) plus the larger of: for Most Taxpayers
a. $800, or
You must file a return if your gross income forb. Your earned income (up to $4,600) plus $250. the year was at least the amount shown on the
appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should
see Table 2 instead.
Married dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
Deceased Persons
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate
You must file an income tax return for a dece-return and itemizes deductions.
dent (a person who died) if both of the following2. Your unearned income was more than $800.
are true.3. Your earned income was more than $4,850.
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of — 1. You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.a. $800, or
2. The decedent met the filing requirementsb.  Your earned income (up to $4,600) plus $250.
described in this publication at the time of
his or her death.
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
For more information, see Final Return for
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separateDecedent in Publication 559.
return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $1,750 ($2,700 if 65 or older and
U.S. Citizens orblind).
Residents Living Abroad3. Your earned income was more than $5,800 ($6,750 if 65 or older and
blind). For purposes of determining whether you must
4. Your gross income was more than $950 ($1,900 if 65 or older and blind) file a return, you must include in your gross
plus the larger of: income all of the income you earned abroad,
including any income you can exclude under thea. $800 or foreign earned income exclusion. For more in-
b. Your earned income (up to $4,600) plus $250. formation on special tax rules that may apply to
you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.
Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.
For information on what form to use — Form erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If
Residents of Puerto Rico1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the you are married and live with your spouse in a
instructions in your tax package. community property state, half of any income Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-defined by state law as community income maydent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. incomebe considered yours. For a list of communityGross income. Gross income is all income tax return if you meet the income requirements.
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop- This is in addition to any legal requirement you
Page 3

Page 4 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
clude your child’s interest and dividend incomeTable 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2004 Return
on your tax return. If you choose to do this, your
child will not have to file a return. However, all ofIf any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2004, you must file a
the following conditions must be met.return.
1. Your child was under age 14 at the end of1. You owe any special taxes, such as: 2004. (A child born on January 1, 1991, is
considered to be age 14 at the end of•
Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.2004; you cannot make the election for this
(See Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income.) child.)
2. Your child is required to file a return for• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you2004 unless you make this election.reported to your employer or on group-term life insurance. (See Publication
3. Your child had gross income only from in-531 and the Form 1040 instructions for lines 58 and 62.)
terest and dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund• Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 44.)
dividends).
• Tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA),4. The interest and dividend income was less
than $8,000.or other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590, Individual Retirement
Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and5. No estimated tax payment was made forOther Tax-Favored Health Plans.) But if you are filing a return only because2004 and no 2003 overpayment was ap-you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself. plied to 2004 under your child’s name and
social security number.
• Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 43 and 62.)6. No federal income tax was withheld from
your child’s income under the backup with-2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your holding rules.employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (See
7. You are the parent whose return must bePublication 596, Earned Income Credit.)
used when making the election to report
your child’s unearned income.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Publication
533, Self-Employment Tax.) For more information, see Parent’s Election
To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends in Pub-
lication 929, and Form 8814.4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.
(See Publication 533.)
Other Situations
You may have to file a tax return even if your
gross income is less than the amount shown inmay have to file an income tax return with Puerto dependent may also have to file if one of theTable 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. SeeRico. situations described in Table 3 applies. Table 3 for those other situations when you mustIf you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the file.Responsibility of parent.If a dependentwhole year, your U.S. gross income does notchild who must file an income tax return cannotinclude income from sources within Puerto Rico.file it for any reason, such as age, a parent,However, include in your U.S. gross income anyguardian, or other legally responsible personincome you received for your services as anmust file it for the child. If the child cannot signWho Should Fileemployee of the United States or any U.S.the return, the parent or guardian must sign theagency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-child’s name followed by the words “By (yourEven if you do not have to file, you should file acan sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, yousignature), parent for minor child.” tax return to get money back if one of the follow-must reduce your standard deduction. This also
ing applies.reduces the amount of income you can haveEarned income. This is salaries, wages, pro-
before you must file a U.S. income tax return.fessional fees, and other amounts received as1. You had income tax withheld from yourFor more information, see Publication 570, pay for work you actually perform. Earned in-pay.Tax Guide for Individuals With Income From come (only for purposes of filing requirements
U.S. Possessions. and the standard deduction) also includes any 2. You qualify for the earned income credit.
part of a scholarship that you must include inSee Publication 596, Earned Income
your gross income. See chapter 1 of PublicationCredit (EIC), for more information.
Individuals With Income From U.S.970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor-3. You qualify for the additional child taxPossessions mation on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.credit. See the instructions in your tax
Child’s earnings.Amounts a child earns by forms package for more information on thisIf you had income from Guam, the Common-
performing services are his or her gross income.credit.wealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American
This is true even if under local law the child’sSamoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rules may 4. You qualify for the health coverage taxparents have the right to the earnings and mayapply when determining whether you must file a credit. For information about this credit,actually have received them. If the child does notU.S. federal income tax return. In addition, you see Form 8885, Health Coverage Taxpay the tax due on this income, the parent ismay have to file a return with the individual Credit.liable for the tax.island government. See Publication 570 for
more information. Unearned income. This is income such as
interest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis-
Dependents tributions of interest, dividends, capital gains,
Filing Statusand survivor annuities are considered unearnedA person who is a dependent may still have toincome also.file a return. This depends on the amount of the You must determine your filing status before you
dependent’s earned income, unearned income,Election to report child’s unearned incomecan determine your filing requirements, stan-
and gross income. For details, see Table 2. A on parent’s return. You may be able to in- dard deduction (discussed later), and correct
Page 4

Page 5 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax. You figure your correct tax by using the Tax deduct your combined allowable expenses. You
1. You are married and living together asComputation Worksheet or the column in the can file a joint return even if one of you had no
husband and wife.Tax Table that applies to your filing status. income or deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a jointYou also use your filing status in determining2. You are living together in a common law
return, your tax may be lower than your com-whether you are eligible to claim certain othermarriage that is recognized in the state
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourdeductions and credits. where you now live or in the state where
standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-the common law marriage began.There are five filing statuses: tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax
3. You are married and living apart, but notbenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.• Single, legally separated under a decree of di-
If you and your spouse each have in-• Married Filing Jointly, vorce or separate maintenance.
come, you may want to figure your tax• Married Filing Separately, 4. You are separated under an interlocutory both on a joint return and on separate
TIP
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposesreturns (using the filing status of married filing• Head of Household, and of filing a joint return, you are not consid-separately). You can choose the method that• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent ered divorced. gives the two of you the lower combined tax.Child.
Spouse died during the year. If your How to file.If you file as married filing jointly,If more than one filing status applies to you,spouse died during the year, you are consideredyou can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youchoose the one that will give you the lowest tax.married for the whole year for filing status pur-have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,
poses. and meet other requirements, you can file FormMarital Status 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,If you did not remarry before the end of the
show this filing status by checking the box ontax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfIn general, your filing status depends on line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theand your deceased spouse. For the next 2whether you are considered unmarried or mar- Tax Table, or Section B of the Tax Computationyears, you may be entitled to the special benefitsried. A marriage means only a legal union be- Worksheet, to figure your tax.described later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withtween a man and a woman as husband and Dependent Child.wife. Spouse died during the year.If your spouse
If you remarried before the end of the taxdied during the year, you are considered mar-
year, you can file a joint return with your newUnmarried persons. You are considered un- ried for the whole year and can choose married
spouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status ismarried for the whole year if, on the last day of filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouse
married filing separately for that year.your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa- died during the year, under Married persons,
rated from your spouse under a divorce or a earlier.Married persons living apart.If you liveseparate maintenance decree. apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,Divorced persons. If you are divorced underState law governs whether you are marriedyou may be considered unmarried. If this appliesa final decree by the last day of the year, you areor legally separated under a divorce or separateto you, you can file as head of household evenconsidered unmarried for the whole year andmaintenance decree. though you are not divorced or legally sepa-you cannot choose married filing jointly as your
rated. If you qualify to file as head of householdfiling status.Divorced persons.  If you are divorced instead of as married filing separately, yourunder a final decree by the last day of the year,standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxyou are considered unmarried for the wholemay be lower, and you may be able to claim theFiling a Joint Returnyear. earned income credit. See Head of Household,
Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a Both you and your spouse must include all oflater.
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing your income, exemptions, and deductions on
tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the your joint return.Singletime of divorce you intended to and did remarry Accounting period.Both of you must use theeach other in the next tax year, you and yourYour filing status is single if, on the last day ofsame accounting period, but you can use differ-spouse must file as married individuals. the year, you are unmarried or legally separatedent accounting methods.from your spouse under a divorce or separateAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a court Joint responsibility.Both of you may be heldmaintenance decree, and you do not qualify fordecree of annulment, which holds that no valid responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxanother filing status. To determine your maritalmarriage ever existed, you are considered un- and any interest or penalty due on your jointstatus on the last day of the year, see Maritalmarried even if you filed joint returns for earlier return. One spouse may be held responsible forStatus, earlier.years. You must file amended returns (Form all the tax due even if all the income was earnedYour filing status may be single if you were1040X) claiming single or head of household by the other spouse.widowed before January 1, 2004, and did notstatus for all tax years affected by the annulment
remarry in 2004. However, you might be able tothat are not closed by the statute of limitations Divorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly
use another filing status that will give you a lowerfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitations and individually responsible for any tax, interest,
tax. See Head of Household and Qualifyinggenerally does not expire until 3 years after your and penalties due on a joint return filed before
Widow(er) With Dependent Child, later, to see iforiginal return was filed. your divorce. This responsibility may apply even
you qualify. if your divorce decree states that your formerHead of household or qualifying widow(er) spouse will be responsible for any amounts duewith dependent child.If you are consideredHow to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if youon previously filed joint returns.unmarried, you may be able to file as a head ofhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,
household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a Relief from joint responsibility.In someand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or
dependent child. See Head of Household and cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return1040, show your filing status as single by check-
see if you qualify. for items of the other spouse which were incor-ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of
rectly reported on the joint return. You can askthe Tax Table, or Section A of the Tax Computa-Married persons. If you are considered mar- for relief no matter how small the liability.tion Worksheet, to figure your tax.ried for the whole year, you and your spouse can There are three types of relief available. 
file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
Married Filing Jointlyturns. 1. Innocent spouse relief, which applies to all
joint filers.Considered married. You are considered You can choose married filing jointly as your
married for the whole year if on the last day of filing status if you are married and both you and 2. Separation of liability, which applies to joint
your tax year you and your spouse meet any one your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint filers who are divorced, widowed, legally
of the following tests. return, you report your combined income and separated, or who have not lived together
Page 5

Page 6 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for the 12 months ending on the date elec- married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of 2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
tion of this relief is filed. ternative minimum tax will be half that al-the year, the spouses can choose to file a joint
lowed to a joint return filer.return. If you do file a joint return, you and your3. Equitable relief, which applies to all jointspouse are both treated as U.S. residents for thefilers who do not qualify for innocent 3. You cannot take the credit for child andentire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publication 519.spouse relief or separation of liability and dependent care expenses in most cases,
to married couples filing separate returns and the amount that you can exclude from
Married Filing Separatelyin community property states. income under an employer’s dependent
care assistance program is limited to You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-You can choose married filing separately as $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a jointcent Spouse Relief, to request any of theseyour filing status if you are married. This filingreturn).kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousestatus may benefit you if you want to be respon-
Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who 4. You cannot take the earned income credit.sible only for your own tax or if it results in less
may qualify for them. tax than filing a joint return. 5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for
If you and your spouse do not agree to file aadoption expenses in most cases.Signing a joint return.For a return to be
joint return, you have to use this filing statusconsidered a joint return, both husband and wife 6. You cannot take the education credits (theunless you qualify for head of household status,generally must sign the return. Hope credit and the lifetime learningdiscussed next. credit), the deduction for student loan inter-Spouse died before signing. If your You may be able to choose head of house- est, or the tuition and fees deduction.spouse died before signing the return, the exec-hold filing status if you live apart from yourutor or administrator must sign the return for 7. You cannot exclude any interest incomespouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredyour spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has from qualified U.S. savings bonds that youunmarried (explained later, under Head ofyet been appointed as executor or administrator, used for higher education expenses.Household). This can apply to you even if youyou can sign the return for your spouse and print
are not divorced or legally separated. If you8. If you lived with your spouse at any time“Filing as surviving spouse” in the area where
qualify to file as head of household, instead of asduring the tax year:you sign the return.
married filing separately, your tax may be lower,
Spouse away from home. If your spouse is a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld-you may be able to claim the earned income
away from home, you should prepare the return, erly or the disabled.credit and certain other credits, and your stan-
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatdard deduction will be higher. The head of b. You will have to include in income moreit can be filed on time. household filing status allows you to choose the(up to 85%) of any social security orstandard deduction even if your spouse choosesInjury or disease prevents signing.If your equivalent railroad retirement benefits
to itemize deductions. See Head of Household,spouse cannot sign because of injury or disease you received, and
later, for more information.and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’s c. You cannot roll over amounts from aname in the proper space on the return followed Unless you are required to file sepa- traditional IRA into a Roth IRA.by the words “By (your name), Husband (or rately, you should figure your tax bothWife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro- ways (on a joint return and on separate
TIP
9. The following credits and deductions arevided for your signature. Attach a dated state-returns). This way you can make sure you arereduced at income levels that are half ofment, signed by you, to the return. The using the filing status that results in the lowestthose for a joint return:statement should include the form number of thecombined tax. However, you will generally payreturn you are filing, the tax year, the reason a. The child tax credit,more combined tax on separate returns thanyour spouse cannot sign, and that your spouseyou would on a joint return for the reasons listedb. The retirement savings contributionshas agreed to your signing for him or her.under Special Rules, later. credit,Signing as guardian of spouse.If you are
c. Itemized deductions, andthe guardian of your spouse who is mentallyHow to file.If you file a separate return, youincompetent, you can sign the return for yourgenerally report only your own income, exemp-d. The deduction for personal exemptions.spouse as guardian. tions, credits, and deductions on your individual
10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500return. You can claim an exemption for yourSpouse in combat zone. If your spouse is
(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-spouse if your spouse had no gross income andunable to sign the return because he or she is
turn).was not the dependent of another person. How-serving in a combat zone (such as the Persian
ever, if your spouse had any gross income orGulf area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, youqualified hazardous duty area (such as Bosnia was the dependent of someone else, you cannotcannot claim the standard deduction. If youand Herzegovina, Croatia, or Macedonia), andclaim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-can claim the standard deduction, your ba-you do not have a power of attorney or otherrate return. sic standard deduction is half the amountstatement, you can sign for your spouse. AttachIf you file as married filing separately, youallowed on a joint return.a signed statement to your return that explainscan use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this
that your spouse is serving in a combat zone.filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).For more information on special tax rules foreither form. You also must enter your spouse’sYou may not be able to deduct all or part of yourpersons who are serving in a combat zone, orsocial security number and full name in thecontributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourwho are in missing status as a result of servingspaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-spouse was covered by an employee retirementin a combat zone, get Publication 3, Armedrately column of the Tax Table or Section C ofplan at work during the year. Your deduction isForces’ Tax Guide. the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure yourreduced or eliminated if your income is more
tax. than a certain amount. This amount is muchOther reasons spouse cannot sign. If
lower for married individuals who file separatelyyour spouse cannot sign the joint return for any
and lived together at any time during the year.other reason, you can sign for your spouse only
Special Rules For more information, see How Much Can Youif you are given a valid power of attorney (a legal
Deduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ-document giving you permission to act for yourIf you choose married filing separately as yourual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyfiling status, the following special rules apply.of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848. Rental activity losses.If you actively partici-Because of these special rules, you will usually
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien.A pated in a passive rental real estate activity thatpay more tax on a separate return than if you
joint return generally cannot be filed if either produced a loss, you generally can deduct theused another filing status that you qualify for.
spouse is a nonresident alien at any time during loss from your nonpassive income up to
1. Your tax rate generally will be higher thanthe tax year. However, if one spouse was a $25,000. This is called a special allowance.
on a joint return.nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was However, married persons filing separate re-
Page 6

Page 7 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
turns who lived together at any time during the Indicate your choice of this filing status byKeeping Up a Home
year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use the
To qualify for head of household status, youried persons filing separate returns who livedHead of a household column of the Tax Table or
must pay more than half of the cost of keepingapart at all times during the year are each al-Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet toup a home for the year. You can determinelowed a $12,500 maximum special allowancefigure your tax. whether you paid more than half of the cost offor losses from passive real estate activities.
keeping up a home by using the Cost of KeepingSee Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passive
Up a Home worksheet, next.Activity and At-Risk Rules. Considered Unmarried
Community property states.If you live in Ari-You are considered unmarried on the last day ofzona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, Cost of Keeping Up a Homethe tax year if you meet all the following tests. New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin
and file separately, your income may be consid-1. You file a separate return (defined, earlier,ered separate income or community income for Amountunder Joint Return After Separate Re-income tax purposes. See Publication 555, You Totalturns).Community Property. Paid Cost
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
Property taxes $ $ing up your home for the tax year.
Mortgage interest expenseJoint Return After 3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur-RentSeparate Returns ing the last 6 months of the tax year. YourUtility charges
spouse is considered to live in your homeYou can change your filing status by filing an Upkeep and repairs
even if he or she is temporarily absent dueamended return using Form 1040X. Property insurance
to special circumstances. See TemporaryIf you or your spouse (or both of you) file a Food consumed
absences, later.separate return, you generally can change to a on the premises
joint return any time within 3 years from the due Other household expenses4. Your home was the main home of yourdate of the separate return or returns. This does Totals $$child, stepchild or adopted child for morenot include any extensions. A separate returnthan half the year or was the main home ofincludes a return filed by you or your spouse Minus total amount you ()your foster child for the entire year. (Seeclaiming married filing separately, single, or paidHome of qualifying person, later, for ruleshead of household filing status. applying to a child’s birth, death, or tempo-Amount others paid $rary absence during the year.)
Separate Returns 5. You must be able to claim an exemption
After Joint Return If the total amount you paid is more than the amountfor the child. However, you can still meet
others paid, you meet the requirement of paying morethis test if you cannot claim the exemptionthan half the cost of keeping up the home.Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseonly because of one of the three situationsto file separate returns for that year after the duedescribed under Exception on page 16.date of the return. The general rules for claiming an exemp-Costs you include.Include in the cost of up-Exception. A personal representative for a tion for a dependent are explained laterkeep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,decedent can change from a joint return electedunder Exemptions for Dependents. real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-by the surviving spouse to a separate return for pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.the decedent. The personal representative has If you were considered married for part
1 year from the due date of the return to make Costs you do not include.Do not include inof the year and lived in a community
the change. See Publication 559 for more infor- the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,property state (listed earlier under Mar-CAUTION
!
mation on filing income tax returns for a dece- education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-ried Filing Separately), special rules may apply
dent. surance, or transportation. Also, do not includein determining your income and expenses. See
the rental value of a home you own or the valuePublication 555 for more information.
of your services or those of a member of yourHead of Household
household.Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-You may be able to file as head of household ifered unmarried for head of household purposesyou meet all the following requirements. if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anyQualifying Person
time during the year and you do not choose to1. You are unmarried or “considered unmar-
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.treat your nonresident spouse as a residentried” on the last day of the year.
Any person not described in Table 4 is not aalien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- qualifying person.person for head of household purposes. Youing up a home for the year. must have another qualifying person and meetHome of qualifying person.Generally, the3. A “qualifying person” lived with you in thethe other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofqualifying person must live with you for morehome for more than half the year (excepthousehold. than half of the year.for temporary absences, such as school).
Earned income credit.Even if you are con-However, your dependent parent does not Special rule for parent.You may be eligi-sidered unmarried for head of household pur-have to live with you. See Special rule for ble to file as head of household even if theposes because you are married to a nonresidentparent, later, under Qualifying Person. A parent for whom you can claim an exemptionalien, you are still considered married for pur-foster child must live with you all year. does not live with you. You must pay more thanposes of the earned income credit (unless youAlso, see Table 4, later. half the cost of keeping up a home that was the
meet the five tests listed earlier under Consid- main home for the entire year for your father or
ered Unmarried). You are not entitled to theIf you qualify to file as head of house- mother. You are keeping up a main home for
hold, your tax rate usually will be lowercredit unless you file a joint return with youryour father or mother if you pay more than half
than the rates for single or married fil-spouse and meet other qualifications. See Publi-
TIP
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
ing separately. You will also receive a highercation 596 for more information. home for the elderly.
standard deduction than if you file as single orChoice to treat spouse as resident.You Death or birth.You may be eligible to file asmarried filing separately. are considered married if you choose to treathead of household if the individual who qualifies
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1How to file.If you file as head of household, you for this filing status is born or dies during the
of Publication 519.you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. year. You must have provided more than half of
Page 7

Page 8 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
you can claim an exemption for him or her2 a qualifying person.parent, grandparent, brother, sister,
stepbrother, stepsister, stepmother,
stepfather, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, half brother, half
sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.son-in-law, or daughter-in-law
he or she is related to you by blood and you can a qualifying person.uncle, aunt, nephew, or niece
claim an exemption for him or her
2, 3
he or she is not related to you by blood3 not a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her
he or she is single a qualifying person.
4child, grandchild, stepchild, or
adopted child he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her2
he or she is married and you cannot claim an not a qualifying person.5
exemption for him or her
the child lived with you all year and you can claim a qualifying person.foster child6
an exemption for him or her2
the child did not live with you all year, or you not a qualifying person.
cannot claim an exemption for him or her
1 A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying person.
See Multiple Support Agreement.
3 You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by blood to a
nephew or niece if he or she is the child or your brother or sister.
4 This child is a qualifying person even if you cannot claim an exemption for the child.
5 This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child’s other parent claims the exemption
under the special rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents.
6 The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents.
the cost of keeping up a home that was the can claim head of household filing status if all with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing
individual’s main home for more than half of the Jointly, earlier.the following statements are true.
year, or, if less, the period during which the You may be eligible to use qualifying
1. The child must be presumed by law en-individual lived. widow(er) with dependent child as your filing
forcement authorities to have been kid-status for 2 years following the year your spouse
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, napped by someone who is not a memberdied. For example, if your spouse died in 2003
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived inof your family or the child’s family.and you have not remarried, you may be able to
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem- use this filing status for 2004 and 2005. The2. In the year of the kidnapping, the childber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment rules for using this filing status are explained inlived with you for more than half the part offor the year until her death was $6,000. You paid detail here.the year before the kidnapping.$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your This filing status entitles you to use joint
brother made no other payments towards your3. You would have qualified for head of return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
mother’s support. Your mother had no income.household filing status if the child had nottion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
Because you paid more than half of the cost ofbeen kidnapped. This status does not entitle you to file a joint
keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu- return.This treatment applies for all years until theary 1 until her death, and you can claim anchild is returned. However, the last year thisexemption for her, you can file as a head of How to file.If you file as a qualifying widow(er)treatment can apply is the earlier of:household. with dependent child, you can use either Form
1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statusTemporary absences. You and your quali- 1. The year there is a determination that the
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Usefying person are considered to live togetherchild is dead, or the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableeven if one or both of you are temporarily absent2. The year the child would have reachedor Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheetfrom your home due to special circumstances age 18. to figure your tax.such as illness, education, business, vacation,
or military service. It must be reasonable to Eligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourassume that the absent person will return to theQualifying Widow(er) 2004 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-home after the temporary absence. You must pendent child if you meet all the following tests. With Dependent Childcontinue to keep up the home during the ab-
sence. If your spouse died in 2004, you can use married1. You were entitled to file a joint return with
filing jointly as your filing status for 2004 if youyour spouse for the year your spouse died.Kidnapped child.You may be eligible to file
It does not matter whether you actuallyotherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofas head of household, even if the child who is
filed a joint return.your qualifying person has been kidnapped. You death is the last year for which you can file jointly
Page 8

Page 9 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Your spouse died in 2002 or 2003 and you same amount ($3,100 for 2004), different rules,Your Spouse’s Exemption
did not remarry before the end of 2004. discussed later, apply to each type.
Your spouse is never considered your depen-
3. You have a child, stepchild, adopted child,Who cannot claim a personal exemption.If dent. You may be able to take one exemption for
or foster child for whom you can claim anyou are entitled to claim an exemption for ayour spouse only because you are married.
exemption. dependent (such as your child), that dependent
Joint return.On a joint return, you can claimcannot claim a personal exemption on his or her4. You paid more than half of the cost of one exemption for yourself and one for yourown tax return.keeping up a home that was the main spouse.home for you and that child for the entireHow to claim exemptions.How you claim an
year, except for temporary absences. See Separate return.If you file a separate return,exemption on your tax return depends on which
Temporary absences and Keeping Up a you can claim the exemption for your spouseform you file.
Home,  discussed earlier under Head of only if your spouse had no gross income, is notForm 1040EZ filers. If you file FormHousehold. filing a return, and was not the dependent of1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined another taxpayer. This is true even if the otherwith the standard deduction and entered on linetaxpayer does not actually claim your spouse’sExample. John Reed’s wife died in 2002.5. exemption. This is also true if your spouse is aJohn has not remarried. He has continued dur- nonresident alien.Form 1040A filers.If you file Form 1040A,ing 2003 and 2004 to keep up a home for himselfcomplete lines 6a through 6d. The total numberand his child for whom he can claim an exemp- Head of household. If you qualify for headof exemptions you can claim is the total in thetion. For 2002 he was entitled to file a joint return of household filing status because you are con-box on line 6d. Also complete line 26 by multiply-for himself and his deceased wife. For 2003 and sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemptioning the number in the box on line 6d by $3,100.2004 he can file as a qualifying widower with a for your spouse if the conditions described in the
dependent child. After 2004 he can file as head preceding paragraph are satisfied.Form 1040 filers.If you file Form 1040,
of household if he qualifies. To claim the exemption for your spouse,complete lines 6a through 6d. On line 41, multi-
check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or Formply the total exemptions shown in the box on line
Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as a 1040A and enter the name of your spouse in the6d by $3,100 and enter the result. If your ad-
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN orjusted gross income is more than $107,025, see
child who qualifies you for this filing status is ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at thePhaseout of Exemptions, later.
born or dies during the year. You must have top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.U.S. citizen or resident. If you are a U.S.provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
Death of spouse. If your spouse died duringcitizen or resident, or a resident of Canada ora home that was the child’s main home during
the year, you generally can claim your spouse’sMexico, you may qualify for any of the exemp-the entire part of the year he or she was alive.
exemption under the rules just explained in Jointtions discussed here.
return and Separate return.Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to fileNonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are aIf you remarried during the year, you cannotas a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child,nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-take an exemption for your deceased spouse.even if the child who qualifies you for this filingada or Mexico, or certain residents of India,If you are a surviving spouse without grossstatus has been kidnapped. You can claim quali-Japan, or Korea), you can qualify for only oneincome and you remarry in the year your spousefying widow(er) with dependent child filing statuspersonal exemption for yourself. You cannotdied, you can be claimed as an exemption onif all the following statements are true.claim exemptions for a spouse or dependents.both the final separate return of your deceasedThese restrictions do not apply if you are aspouse and the separate return of your new1. The child must be presumed by law en-nonresident alien married to a citizen or residentspouse for that year. If you file a joint return withforcement authorities to have been kid-of the United States and have chosen to beyour new spouse, you can be claimed as annapped by someone who is not a membertreated as a resident of the United States.exemption only on that return.of your family or the child’s family. For information on exemptions if you are a
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child nonresident alien, see chapter 5 in PublicationDivorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
lived with you for more than half the part of 519. tained a final decree of divorce or separate
the year before the kidnapping. maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotDual-status taxpayers.If you have been bothtake your former spouse’s exemption. This rule3. You would have qualified for qualifyinga nonresident alien and a resident alien in theapplies even if you provided all of your formerwidow(er) with dependent child filing statussame tax year, you should get Publication 519spouse’s support.if the child had not been kidnapped. for information on determining your exemptions.
ExemptionsAs mentioned earlier, this filing statusPersonal Exemptions
is available for only 2 years following for Dependents
the year your spouse died. You are generally allowed one exemption forCAUTION
!
You are allowed one exemption for each personyourself and, if you are married, one exemption
you can claim as a dependent.for your spouse. These are called personal ex-
To claim the exemption for a dependent, youemptions.
must meet all five of the dependency tests dis-
Exemptions cussed later. You can claim an exemption for
your dependent even if your dependent files aYour Own Exemption
Exemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen- return.
erally, you can deduct $3,100 for each exemp-You can take one exemption for yourself unless If you are entitled to claim an exemp-tion you claim in 2004. If you are entitled to twoyou can be claimed as a dependent by another tion for your dependent, that depen-exemptions for 2004, you would deduct $6,200taxpayer. dent cannot claim his or her personalCAUTION
!
($3,100 × 2). But you may lose the benefit of part exemption.Single persons.If another taxpayer is entitledor all of your exemptions if your adjusted grossto claim you as a dependent, you cannot take anincome is above a certain amount. See Kidnapped child. You may be eligible toexemption for yourself. This is true even if thePhaseout of Exemptions, later. claim the exemption for a child even if the childother taxpayer does not actually claim your ex-You usually can claim exemptions for your- has been kidnapped. Both of the following state-emption.self, your spouse, and each person you can ments must be true.
Married persons. If you file a joint return, youclaim as a dependent.
can take your own exemption. If you file a sepa- 1. The child must be presumed by law en-
Types of exemptions.There are two types of rate return, you can take your own exemption forcement authorities to have been kid-
exemptions: personal exemptions and exemp- only if another taxpayer is not entitled to claim napped by someone who is not a member
tions for dependents. While each is worth the you as a dependent. of your family or the child’s family.
Page 9

Page 10 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship Test. )
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
5
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $3,100 or more during the tax
year?4
Was the person your child?
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24 .)
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, ans wer “yes” to this question.
2If neither the person nor the person’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refun d of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. ( See Disabled dependents.)
5If your adjusted gross income is more than $107,025, see Table 6, Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet.
2. The child must have qualified as your de-Child born alive.If your child was born aliveExample. Your dependent mother died on
pendent for the part of the year before the during the year, and the dependency tests areJanuary 15. The five dependency tests are met.
kidnapping. met, you can claim the exemption. This is true You can claim the exemption for her on your
even if the child lived only for a moment. State orreturn.If both statements are true, the child islocal law must treat the child as having beentreated as your dependent and you qualify to Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If theseborn alive. There must be proof of a live birthclaim the exemption. people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-shown by an official document, such as a birthThis treatment applies for all years until the tions for them.certificate.child is returned. However, the last year this
Stillborn child.You cannot claim an exemp-treatment can apply is the earlier of:
tion for a stillborn child. Child tax credit.You may be entitled to a child1. The year there is a determination that the tax credit for each of your qualifying children forDeath of dependent. If your dependent diedchild is dead, or whom you can claim an exemption. For moreduring the year and otherwise met the depen-
information, see the instructions in your tax2. The year the child would have reached dency tests, you can claim the exemption for
forms package.age 18. your dependent.
Page 10

Page 11 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your parent, grandparent, or other direct can take the exemption. It does not matter if theDependency Tests
ancestor, but not foster parent. child lives abroad with the nonresident alien
The following five tests must be met for you to parent.• Your stepfather or stepmother.claim an exemption for a dependent.
Adopted child.If you are a U.S. citizen who• A brother or sister of your father orhas legally adopted a child who is not a U.S.1. Member of Household or Relationship Test.mother. citizen or resident, and the other dependency2. Citizen or Resident Test. • A son or daughter of your brother or sister.tests are met, you can take the exemption if your
home is the child’s main home and the child is a3. Joint Return Test. • Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, member of your household for your entire taxson-in-law, daughter-in-law,4. Gross Income Test. year.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.5. Support Test.
Foreign students’ place of residence.For-Any of these relationships that were established
eign students brought to this country under aby marriage are not ended by death or divorce.
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-Adoption. Even if your adoption of a child is1. Member of Household or
porary period generally are not U.S. residentsnot yet final, the child is considered to be your Relationship Test
and do not meet the citizen or resident test. Youchild if he or she was placed with you for legal
To meet this test, a person must either: cannot claim an exemption for them. However, ifadoption by an authorized placement agency.
you provided a home for a foreign student, youThe child must also be a member of your house-1. Live with you for the entire year as a mem- may be able to take a charitable contributionhold, but does not have to be a member of yourber of your household, or deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Liv-household for the entire year.
ing With You in Publication 526, Charitable Con-If the child was not placed with you by an2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed
tributions.authorized placement agency, the child willlater under Relatives who do not have to
meet this test only if he or she was a member oflive with you.
your household for your entire tax year.If at any time during the year the person was 3. Joint Return TestAuthorized placement agency.An author-your spouse, that person cannot be your depen-
ized placement agency includes any person ordent. However, see Personal Exemptions, ear- Even if the other dependency tests are met, you
court authorized by state law to place childrenlier. generally are not allowed an exemption for your
for legal adoption. dependent if he or she files a joint return.Temporary absences. A person lives with
Foster child.A foster child must live with youyou as a member of your household even if Example. You supported your daughter foras a member of your household for the entireeither (or both) of you are temporarily absent the entire year while her husband was in theyear to qualify as your dependent. For this test, adue to special circumstances. Temporary ab- Armed Forces. The couple files a joint return.foster child is one who is in your care that yousences due to special circumstances include Even though all the other tests are met, youcare for as your own child. It does not matterabsences because of illness, education, busi- cannot take an exemption for your daughter.how the child became a member of the house-ness, vacation, or military service.
hold.If the person is placed in a nursing home for Exception. The joint return test does not apply
an indefinite period of time to receive constant if a joint return is filed by the dependent and hisCousin. You can claim an exemption for yourmedical care, the absence is considered tempo- or her spouse merely as a claim for refund andcousin only if he or she lives with you as arary. no tax liability would exist for either spouse onmember of your household for the entire year. A
separate returns.cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister ofDeath or birth.A person who died during the
your father or mother.year, but was a member of your household until Example. Your son and his wife each haddeath, will meet the member of household test.Joint return.If you file a joint return, you doless than $3,000 of wages and no unearnedThe same is true for a child who was born duringnot need to show that a person is related to bothincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.the year and was a member of your householdyou and your spouse. You also do not need toTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed afor the rest of the year. The test is also met if ashow that a person is related to the spouse whojoint return to get a refund. You are allowed tochild would have been a member except for anyprovides support. take exemptions for your son andrequired hospital stay following birth. For example, your spouse’s uncle who re-daughter-in-law if the other dependency tests
ceives more than half of his support from youare met, even though they filed a joint return.Local law violated.A person does not meet
may be your dependent, even though he doesthe member of household test if at any time
not live with you. However, if you and yourduring your tax year the relationship between
4. Gross Income Testspouse file separate returns, your spouse’s un-you and that person violates local law.
cle can be your dependent only if he is a mem-
Generally, you cannot take an exemption for aber of your household and lives with you for yourExample. Your girlfriend lived with you as a dependent if that person had gross income ofentire tax year.member of your household all year. However, $3,100 or more for 2004. This test does notyour relationship with her violated the laws of the apply if the person is your child and is either:state where you live, because she was married
2. Citizen or Resident Testto someone else. Therefore, she does not meet 1. Under age 19 at the end of the year, or
this test and you cannot claim her as a depen- You cannot claim an exemption for a dependent2. A student under age 24 at the end of thedent. unless that person is a U.S. citizen or resident,year.
or a resident of Canada or Mexico, for some partRelatives who do not have to live with you. The exceptions for children under age 19 andof the calendar year in which your tax yearA person related to you in any of the following students under age 24 are discussed in detailbegins. However, there is an exception for cer-ways does not have to live with you for the entire later.tain adopted children, as explained next.year as a member of your household to meet If you file on a fiscal year basis, the grossthis test. Children’s place of residence.Children usu- income test applies to the calendar year in which
ally are citizens or residents of the country of• Your child, grandchild, great grandchild, your fiscal year begins.
their parents.etc. (A legally adopted child is considered
If you were a U.S. citizen when your childGross income defined.All income in the formyour child.)
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al- of money, property, and services that is not• Your stepchild. though the other parent was a nonresident alien exempt from tax is gross income.
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- and the child was born in a foreign country. If so, In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. and the other dependency tests are met, you ing business, gross income is the total net sales
Page 11

Page 12 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- (1) above or a state, county, or local gov-Child’s wages used for own support.You
neous income from the business. cannot include in your contribution to yourernment.
Gross receipts from rental property are gross child’s support any support that is paid for by the
income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., toFull-time student defined.A full-time stu-child with the child’s own wages, even if you paid
determine the gross income from rental prop-dent is a person who is enrolled for the numberthe wages.
erty. of hours or courses the school considers to be
Year support is provided.The year you pro-Gross income includes a partner’s share offull-time attendance.
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifthe gross (not a share of the net) partnershipSchool defined.The term “school” includesyou do so with borrowed money that you repayincome. elementary schools, junior and senior highin a later year.Gross income also includes all unemploy-schools, colleges, universities, and technical,ment compensation and certain scholarship and If you use a fiscal year to report your income,trade, and mechanical schools. It does not in-fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de- you must provide more than half of theclude on-the-job training courses, correspond-gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees, dependent’s support for the calendar year inence schools, and night schools.supplies, books, and equipment required for which your fiscal year begins.
particular courses may not be included in grossExample. James, 22, attends college as aincome. For more information about scholar- Armed Forces dependency allotments.Thefull-time student. During the summer, Jamesships, see chapter 1 of Publication 970, Tax part of the allotment contributed by the govern-earned $4,000. If the other dependency testsBenefits for Education. ment and the part taken out of your military payare met, his parents can take the exemption forTax-exempt income, such as certain social are both considered provided by you in figuringJames.security payments, is not included in gross in- whether you provide more than half of the sup-
come. port. If your allotment is used to support personsVocational high school students.People
other than those you name, you can take thewho work on “co-op” jobs in private industry as aDisabled dependents. For this gross in- exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.part of the school’s prescribed course of class-come test, gross income does not include in-room and practical training are consideredcome received by a permanently and totally Example. You are in the Armed Forces.full-time students.disabled individual for services performed at a You authorize an allotment for your widowedsheltered workshop. The availability of medicalNight school. Your child is not a full-timemother that she uses to support herself and yourcare must be the main reason the individual is atstudent while attending school only at night.sister. If the allotment provides more than half ofthe workshop. Also, the income must come However, full-time attendance at a school cantheir support, you can take an exemption forsolely from activities at the workshop that areinclude some attendance at night as part of aeach of them, if they otherwise qualify, evenincident to this medical care. A sheltered work-full-time course of study. though you authorize the allotment only for yourshop is a school operated by certain tax-exempt mother.organizations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,
a political subdivision of a state or possession, Tax-exempt military quarters allowances.5. Support Test
the United States, or the District of Columbia, These allowances are treated the same way as
Generally, you must provide more than half of athat provides special instruction or training de- dependency allotments in figuring support. The
person’s total support during the calendar yearsigned to alleviate the disability of the individual. allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-
to meet the support test. However, there areance for quarters are both considered as pro-Child defined.For purposes of the gross in-special rules that apply in the following two situa-vided by you for support.come test, your child is your son, stepson,tions.daughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted child, Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person’sor a child who was placed with you by an author-1. Two or more persons provide support, buttotal support, include tax-exempt income, sav-ized placement agency for your legal adoption.no one person provides more than half of aings, and borrowed amounts used to supportA foster child who was a member of your house-person’s total support. See Multiple Sup- that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-hold for your entire tax year is also consideredport Agreement, later. tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,your child. nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed2. The person supported is the child of di-Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,Child under age 19.If your child is under 19 atvorced or separated parents. See Support and tax-exempt interest.the end of the year, the gross income test doesTest for Child of Divorced or Separated
not apply. Your child can have any amount ofParents, later. Example 1. You provide $4,000 towardincome and you still can claim an exemption if
your mother’s support during the year. She hasthe other dependency tests, including the sup-
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-How to determine if test is met.You figureport test, are met.
curity benefit payments of $4,800, and tax-ex-whether you have provided more than half of a
empt interest of $200. She uses all these for herperson’s total support by comparing the amountExample. Marie, 18, earned $4,000. Her fa-
support. You cannot claim an exemption for youryou contributed to that person’s support with thether provided more than half her support. Be-
mother because the $4,000 you provide is notentire amount of support that person receivedcause Marie is under 19, the gross income test
more than half of her total support of $9,600.from all sources. This includes support the per-does not apply. If the other dependency tests
son provided from his or her own funds.were met, Marie’s father can claim an exemption
Example 2. Your daughter takes out a stu-for her. You may find Worksheet 1 helpful in figuringdent loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her col-whether you provided more than half of aStudent under age 24.The gross income test lege tuition. She is personally responsible for theperson’s support.does not apply if your child is a student who is loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total sup-
under age 24 at the end of the calendar year. port. You cannot claim an exemption for yourPerson’s own funds not used for support.The other dependency tests still must be met. daughter because you provide less than half ofA person’s own funds are not support unlessher support.Student defined.To qualify as a student,they are actually spent for support.
your child must be, during some part of each of 5 Social security benefit payments.If a
Example. Your mother received $2,400 incalendar months during the calendar year (not husband and wife each receive payments that
social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shenecessarily consecutive): are paid by one check made out to both of them,
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.half of the total paid is considered to be for the1. A full-time student at a school that has aShe put $300 in a savings account. support of each spouse, unless they can showregular teaching staff, course of study, and otherwise.Even though your mother received a total ofregularly enrolled body of students in at-$2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-If a child receives social security benefits andtendance, or port. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup- uses them toward his or her own support, the
payments are considered as provided by theport and no other support was received, you2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
child.have provided more than half of her support.ing course given by a school described in
Page 12

Page 13 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 1. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year............................................ 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person’s support....................... 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes........................... 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person’s savings and other accounts at the end of the year....... 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.)............................. 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
6a. Enter the total rent paid.................................................. 6a.
6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home,
also include this amount in line 20............................................. 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses................................................. 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b).......... 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b).......................... 9.
10.Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance.................................. 10.
11.Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses....................... 11.
12.Enter total number of persons who lived in the household............................. 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13.Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person’s share of the household expenses.............. 13.
14.Enter the person’s total clothing expenses........................................ 14.
15.Enter the person’s total education expenses....................................... 15.
16.Enter the person’s total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . .16.
17.Enter the person’s total travel and recreation expenses............................... 17.
18.Enter the total of the person’s other expenses..................................... 18.
19.Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person’s support for the year............ 19.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
20.Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support............... 20.
21.Enter the amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . .21.
22.Add lines 20 and 21........................................................ 22.
23.Subtract line 22 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person’s support........ 23.
24.Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50).................................................. 24.
Is line 23 more than line 24?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other dependency tests are met, you can claim an exemption for the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can do so under a
multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement later in this publication.
Support provided by the state (welfare,qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
food stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits pro- butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-advance payment to a home for the aged to take
vided by the state to a needy person generallyble contributions, but are not considered supportcare of your relative for life and the payment is
are considered support provided by the state.you provided. For more information about thebased on that person’s life expectancy, the
However, payments based on the needs of thededuction for charitable contributions, see Publi-amount of support you provide each year is the
recipient will not be considered as used entirely cation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses arelump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life
not deductible as charitable contributions, theyfor that person’s support if it is shown that part of expectancy. The amount of support you provide
are considered support you provided.the payments were not used for that purpose. also includes any other amounts that you pro-
If you are in the trade or business of provid-vided during the year.
Foster care payments and expenses.Pay- ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses
ments you receive for the support of a fosterare not considered support provided by you.
child from a child placement agency are consid- Total Support
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with
payments you receive for the support of a foster To figure if you provided more than half of aMr. and Mrs. Smith. The Smiths cared for
child from a state or county are considered sup- person’s support, you must first determine theLauren because they wanted to adopt her, not
port provided by the state or county. total support provided for that person. Total sup-as a trade or business or to benefit the agency
port includes amounts spent to provide food,If you are not in the trade or business ofthat placed her in their home. The Smiths’ un-
lodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalproviding foster care and your unreimbursedreimbursed expenses are not deductible as
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fostercharitable contributions, but are considered sup-
child were mainly to benefit an organizationport they provided for Lauren. cessities.
Page 13

Page 14 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, the amount of an item of support value of the lodging, so these are not considered given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid- separately. Because a lawn mower is ordinarily an item you
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support buy for personal and family reasons that bene-
is the fair rental value of the lodging. fits all members of the household, you cannotLodging. If you provide a person with lodging,
include the cost of the lawn mower in the supportyou are considered to provide support equal toExpenses that are not directly related to any of your child.the fair rental value of the room, apartment,one member of a household, such as the cost ofhouse, or other shelter in which the person lives.food for the household, must be divided among Example 2. You buy a $150 television setFair rental value includes a reasonable allow-the members of the household. as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.ance for the use of furniture and appliances, and
The television set is placed in your child’s bed-for heat and other utilities that are provided.Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary room. You can include the cost of the televisionMiller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirFair rental value defined.This is the set in the support of your child.two children. Grace gets social security benefitsamount you could reasonably expect to receive
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andportation, and recreation. Grace has no otherused instead of actual expenses such as rent orregister it in your name. You and yourincome. Frank and Mary’s total food expense fortaxes, interest, depreciation, paint, insurance,17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-the household is $5,200. They pay Grace’sutilities, cost of furniture and appliances, etc. Incause you own the car and do not give it to yourmedical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairsome cases, fair rental value may be equal todaughter but merely let her use it, you cannotrental value of the lodging provided for Grace isthe rent paid. include the cost of the car in your daughter’s$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similarIf you provide the total lodging, the amount oftotal support. However, you can include in yourrooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total supportsupport you provide is the fair rental value of thedaughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensesas follows: room the person uses, or a share of the fairof operating the car for her benefit.
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
has use of your entire home. If you do not pro-Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, usingFair rental value of lodging...... $  1,800 vide the total lodging, the total fair rental valuepersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-Clothing, transportation and must be divided depending on how much of thevide all the rest of your son’s support — $4,000.recreation.................. 2,400 total lodging you provide. If you provide only aSince the car is bought and owned by your son,
part and the person supplies the rest, the fairMedical expenses............ 1,200 the car’s fair market value ($4,500) must be
rental value must be divided between both ofincluded in his support. The $4,000 support youShare of food (1/5 of $5,200)..... 1,040 you according to the amount each provides.provide is less than half of his total support of
Total support............... $6,440 $8,500. You cannot claim an exemption for your
Example. Your parents live rent free in ason.
house you own. It has a fair rental value ofBecause the support Frank and Mary pro-
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairvide ($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical ex- Medical insurance premiums.Medical insur-
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800penses + $1,040 food = $4,040) is more than ance premiums you pay, including premiums for
for the furniture. This does not include heat andhalf of Grace’s $6,440 total support, and Grace supplementary Medicare coverage, are in-
utilities. The house is completely furnished withmeets the other dependency tests, they can cluded in the support you provide.
furniture belonging to your parents. You payclaim an exemption for her. Medical insurance benefits.Medical in-$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallysurance benefits, including basic and supple-included in rent for houses in the area whereExample 2. Your parents live with you, your mentary Medicare benefits, are not part ofyour parents live. Therefore, you consider thespouse, and your two children in a house you support.total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000own. The fair rental value of your parents’ share
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedof the lodging is $2,000 a year, which includes Tuition payments and allowances under thehouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-furnishings and utilities. Your father receives a GI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under thevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)nontaxable pension of $4,200, which he spends GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances whileof which you are considered to provide $4,200equally between your mother and himself for they attend school are included in total support.($3,600 + $600).items of support such as clothing, transporta-
tion, and recreation. Your total food expense for Example. During the year, your son re-Person living in his or her own home.Thethe household is $6,000. Your heat and utility ceives $2,200 from the government under the GItotal fair rental value of a person’s home that hebills amount to $1,200. Your mother has hospital Bill. He uses this amount for his education. Youor she owns is considered support contributedand medical expenses of $600, which you pay provide the rest of his support — $2,000. Be-by that person.during the year. Figure your parents’ total sup- cause GI benefits are included in total support,Living with someone rent free.If you liveport as follows: your son is not your dependent.with a person rent free in his or her home, you
must reduce the amount you provide for supportChild care expenses.If you pay someone toSupport provided Father Mother by the fair rental value of lodging he or sheprovide child care or disabled dependent care,Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000provides you. you can include these payments in the amount
you provided for the support of your child orPension spent for their
Property. Property provided as support isdisabled dependent, even if you claim a creditsupport ............. 2,100 2,100
measured by its fair market value. Fair marketfor the payments. For information on the credit,Share of food (1/6 of value is the price that property would sell for onsee Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care$6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000 the open market. It is the price that would beExpenses.
Medical expenses for agreed upon between a willing buyer and a
mother.............. 6 0 0 Other support items. Other items may bewilling seller, with neither being required to act,
considered as support depending on the facts inand both having reasonable knowledge of theParents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700 each case.relevant facts.
You must apply the support test separatelyCapital expenses. Capital items, such as
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000furniture, appliances, and cars, that are bought
Do Not Includelodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-for a person during the year can be included inin Total Supportport of $4,100 — less than half. You providetotal support under certain circumstances.
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000The following examples show when a capitalThe following items are not included in total
food, $600 medical) — more than half of heritem is or is not support. support.
total support of $4,700. You meet the support
test for your mother, but not your father. HeatExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawn 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid
and utility costs are included in the fair rental mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is by persons from their own income.
Page 14

Page 15 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid by Exception. The noncustodial parent will beSupport Test for Child of
persons from their own income. treated as providing more than half of the child’sDivorced or Separated Parents
support if:3. Life insurance premiums. The support test for a child of divorced or sepa-
rated parents is based on the special rules ex-4. Funeral expenses. 1. The custodial parent signs a written decla-
plained here and shown in Figure B. However, ration, discussed later, that he or she will5. Scholarships received by your child if yourthese special rules apply only if all the followingnot claim the exemption for the child, andchild is a full-time student. are true. the noncustodial parent attaches this writ-
6. Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational ten declaration to his or her return,
1. The parents are divorced or legally sepa-Assistance payments used for the support 2. The custodial parent signed a decree orrated under a decree of divorce or sepa-of the child who receives them. agreement executed after 1984 stating thatrate maintenance, or separated under a
he or she will not claim the exemption forwritten separation agreement, or lived
the child and that the noncustodial parentapart at all times during the last 6 monthsMultiple Support Agreement can claim an exemption for the child with-of the calendar year.
out regard to any condition such as pay-Sometimes no one provides more than half of2. One or both parents provide more than ment of support, and the noncustodialthe support of a person. Instead, two or morehalf of the child’s total support for the cal-parent attaches to his or her return thepersons, each of whom would be able to take endar year. documentation described later under Di-the exemption but for the support test, together vorce decree or separation agreement3. One or both parents have custody of theprovide more than half of the person’s support. made after 1984, orchild for more than half of the calendarWhen this happens, you can agree that anyyear. 3. A decree or agreement executed beforeone of you who individually provides more than
1985 provides that the noncustodial parent10% of the person’s support, but only one, can“Child” is defined earlier under 4. Gross In-
is entitled to the exemption, and he or sheclaim an exemption for that person. Each of thecome Test.
provides at least $600 for the child’s sup-others must sign a statement agreeing not toThis discussion does not apply if the supportport during the year, unless the pre-1985claim the exemption for that year. The personof the child is determined under a multiple sup-decree or agreement is modified afterwho claims the exemption must keep these port agreement, discussed earlier. 1984 to specify that this provision will notsigned statements for his or her records. A multi-
apply.ple support declaration identifying each of theGeneral rule.The parent who has custody of
others who agreed not to claim the exemptionthe child for the greater part of the year (theNoncustodial parent. The noncustodialmust be attached to the return of the personcustodial parent) is generally treated as the par-parent is the parent who has custody of the childclaiming the exemption. Form 2120, Multipleent who provides more than half of the child’sfor the shorter part of the year or who does notSupport Declaration, can be used for this pur-support. It does not matter whether the custodialhave custody at all.pose. parent actually provided more than half of the
support. Written declaration. The custodial parentExample 1. You, your sister, and your two may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementCustody. Custody is usually determined bybrothers provide the entire support of your (containing the information required by the form)the terms of the most recent decree of divorce ormother for the year. You provide 45%, your to make the written declaration to release theseparate maintenance, or a later custody de-sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide exemption to the noncustodial parent. The non-cree. If there is no decree, use the written sepa-10%. Either you or your sister can claim an custodial parent must attach the form or state-ration agreement. If neither a decree norexemption for your mother. The other must sign ment to his or her tax return.agreement establishes custody, then the parenta statement agreeing not to take an exemption
The exemption can be released for a singlewho has the physical custody of the child for thefor your mother. The one who claims the exemp-
year, for a number of specified years (for exam-greater part of the year is considered to havetion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-
ple, alternate years), or for all future years, ascustody of the child. This also applies if thetion, to his or her return and must keep the
specified in the declaration. If the exemption isvalidity of a decree or agreement awarding cus-statement signed by the other for his or her
released for more than one year, the originaltody is uncertain because of legal proceedingsrecords. Because neither brother provides more
release must be attached to the return of thepending on the last day of the calendar year.than 10% of the support, neither can take the
noncustodial parent for the first year, and a copyexemption and neither has to sign a statement.If the parents are divorced or separated dur-
must be attached for each later year.ing the year and had joint custody of the child
Example 2. You and your brother each pro-before the separation, the parent who has cus-Divorce decree or separation agreement
vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.tody for the greater part of the rest of the year ismade after 1984. If your divorce decree or
The remaining 60% of her support is providedconsidered to have custody of the child for theseparation agreement was executed after 1984,
equally by two persons who are not related totax year. the noncustodial parent does not have to attach
her. She does not live with them. Because more Form 8332 if both of the following requirements
than half of her support is provided by personsExample 1. Under the terms of your di-are met.
who cannot claim an exemption for her, no onevorce, you have custody of your child for 10
can take the exemption. months of the year. Your former spouse has1. The decree or agreement is signed by the
custody for the other 2 months. You and yourcustodial parent and states all of the fol-
Example 3. Your father lives with you andformer spouse provide the child’s total support.lowing.
receives 25% of his support from social security,You are considered to have provided more than
40% from you, 24% from his brother, and 11% a. The custodial parent will not claim thehalf of the support of the child. However, see
from a friend. Either you or your uncle can take child as a dependent for the year.Exception, later.
the exemption for your father if the other signs a b. The noncustodial parent can claim thestatement agreeing not to. The one who takesExample 2. You and your former spouse child as a dependent without regard tothe exemption must attach Form 2120, or aprovided your child’s total support for 2004. Forany condition, such as payment of sup-similar declaration, to his return and must keepthe first 8 months of the year, you had custody ofport.for his records the signed statement from theyour child under your 1996 divorce decree (the
one agreeing not to take the exemption. most recent decree at the time). On August 31,c. The years for which the noncustodial
2004, a new custody decree granted custody to parent, rather than the custodial parent,
your former spouse. Because you had custody can claim the child as a dependent.
for the greater part of the year, you are consid-
ered to have provided more than half of your 2. The noncustodial parent attaches a copy
child’s support, unless the exception described of the following pages of the decree or
next applies. agreement to his or her tax return.
Page 15

Page 16 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a decree or agreement
executed after 1984 releasing
the exemption?
Start Here
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the
child’s total support?
Is the child in the custody
of one or both parents for
more than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign a
Form 8332 or similar statement
releasing the exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided
over half of the child’s
support meets the support
test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984) that
entitles the noncustodial
parent to the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child’s
support during the year?
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
The custodial parent meets
the support test.
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Is the noncustodial parent
attaching the signed form or
other required documentation
to his or her return?
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Yes
Page 16

Page 17 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
child’s entire lodging. It does not matter if theWorksheet 2. Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for
legal title to the home remains in the names ofExemptions for Filers of Form 1040
both parents.
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 37, more than the amount on line 4
below for your filing status? Parents who never married. These special
❏ No. Stop. Multiply $3,100 by the total number of exemptions claimed rules for divorced or separated parents also ap-
on Form 1040, line 6d, and enter the result on line 41. ply to parents who never married.
❏ Yes. Continue.
Phaseout of Exemptions2. Multiply $3,100 by the total number of exemptions claimed on Form
1040, line 6d........................................ 2 .
The amount you can claim as a deduction for
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 37....3 . exemptions is phased out once your adjusted
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain level4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing for your filing status. These levels are as follows:status:
• Married filing separately— AGI Level$107,025 Which Reduces
• Single—$142,700 Filing Status Exemption Amount4.• Head of household—$178,350 Married filing separately . . $107,025
Single.............. 142,700• Married filing jointly or Qualifying
Head of household...... 178,350widow(er)—$214,050
}
Married filing jointly..... 214,0505. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If the result is more Qualifying widow(er)..... 214,050than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing
You must reduce the dollar amount of yourseparately) stop here. You cannot take a
exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofdeduction for exemptions.................5 .
$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if rately), that your AGI exceeds the amountmarried filing separately). If the result is shown above for your filing status. If your AGInot a whole number, round it up to the exceeds the amount shown above by more thannext higher whole number......... 6 . $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02) and enter the the amount of your deduction for exemptions is
result as a decimal amount........ 7 . reduced to zero.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing8. Multiply line 2 by line 7................................. 8 status, use Worksheet 2 to figure the amount of
your deduction for exemptions.9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result
here and on Form 1040, line 41........................... 9 .
Social Security
Numbers for Dependents
a. The cover page (write the other parent’s amount owed from last year and the full amount
You must list the social security number (SSN)social security number on this page). due for this year. Your payment of this year’s
of any person for whom you claim an exemptionchild support counts as your support for thisb. The pages that contain the information in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 oryear, but payment of the amount owed from lastshown in item (1). Form 1040A.year does not count as support either for this
c. The signature page with the other year or for last year.  If you do not list the dependent’s SSN
parent’s signature and the date of the when required or if you list an incorrectThird-party support.Support provided by aagreement. SSN, the exemption may be disal-CAUTION
!
third party for a divorced or separated parent islowed.not included as support provided by that parent.If these requirements are not met, theHowever, see Remarried parent, below.noncustodial parent must attach to his No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to
or her return Form 8332 or a similar claim an exemption on your return does notCAUTION
!
Example. You are divorced. During the en-statement from the custodial parent releasing have an SSN, either you or that person shouldtire year you and your child live with your motherthe exemption. apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filingin a house she owns. The fair rental value of the
Form SS-5, Application for a Social Securitylodging provided by your mother for your child is
Card, with the Social Security AdministrationChild support.All child support payments ac-$3,000. The home provided by your mother is
(SSA). Information about applying for an SSNtually received from the noncustodial parent arenot included in the amount of support you pro-
and Form SS-5 is available at your local SSAconsidered used for the support of the child.vide.
office.
Remarried parent.If you remarry, the sup-It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.Example. The noncustodial parent providesport provided by your new spouse is treated asIf you do not have a required SSN by the filing$1,200 for the child’s support. This amount isprovided by you. due date, you can file Form 4868, Application forconsidered support provided by the noncus-
Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi-todial parent even if the $1,200 was actuallyExample. You have two children from a for-vidual Income Tax Return, for an extension ofspent on things other than support. mer marriage who live with you. You have re-time to file.Paid in a later year.If you fail to pay childmarried and are living in a home owned by your
Born and died in 2004.If your child wassupport in the year it is due, but pay it in a laternew spouse. The fair rental value of the home
born and died in 2004, and you do not have anyear, your payment of the overdue amount is notprovided to the children by your new spouse is
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of theconsidered paid for the support of your childtreated as provided by you.
child’s birth certificate instead. If you do, entereither for the year the payment was due or for
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your FormHome jointly owned. If you and your formerthe year it is paid. It is payment of an amount you
1040 or Form 1040A.spouse have the right to use and live in theowed to the custodial parent, but it is not consid-
home, each of you is considered to provide halfered paid by you for the support of your child.
of your child’s lodging. However, if the divorceAlien or adoptee with no SSN.If your depen-
Example. You owed but failed to pay child decree gives only you the right to use and live in dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, you
support last year. This year, you pay all of the the home, you are considered to provide your must list the individual taxpayer identification
Page 17

Page 18 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica- If you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
1. You cannot see better than 20/200 in thetion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN. ried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of
better eye with glasses or contact lenses,the year, you can choose to be treated as aTaxpayer identification numbers for orU.S. resident. (See Publication 519.) If youaliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-make this choice, you can take the standard2. Your field of vision is not more than 20resident alien who does not have and is not deduction. degrees.eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must
apply for an individual taxpayer identification If your eye condition will never improve be-If an exemption for you can be claimednumber (ITIN). For details on how to apply, see yond these limits, the statement should includeon another person’s return (such asForm W-7, Application for IRS Individual Tax- this fact. You must keep the statement in youryour parents’ return), your standardCAUTION
!
payer Identification Number. records.deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
If your vision can be corrected beyond theseTaxpayer identification numbers for tion for Dependents, later.
limits only by contact lenses that you can wearadoptees. If you have a child who was placed
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,with you by an authorized placement agency,Standard Deduction Amount you can take the higher standard deduction foryou may be able to claim an exemption for the
blindness if you otherwise qualify.child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anThe standard deduction amount depends onITIN for the child, you must get an adoptionyour filing status, whether you are 65 or older ortaxpayer identification number (ATIN) for theblind, and whether an exemption can be claimedSpouse 65 or Older or Blindchild from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Applicationfor you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pendingdard deduction amounts are adjusted each yearYou can take the higher standard deduction ifU.S. Adoptions, for details. for inflation. The standard deduction amountsyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
for most taxpayers for 2004 are shown in Table
1. You file a joint return, or5.
The amount of the standard deduction for a2. You file a separate return and can claim anStandard Deduction decedent’s final tax return is the same as itexemption for your spouse because yourwould have been had the decedent continued tospouse had no gross income and an ex-Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking alive. However, if the decedent was not 65 oremption for your spouse could not bestandard deduction or itemizing their deduc-older at the time of death, the higher standardclaimed by another taxpayer.tions. The standard deduction is a dollar amountdeduction for age cannot be claimed.
that reduces the amount of income on which you You cannot claim the higher standardare taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need deduction for an individual other thanfor many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,Higher Standard Deduction for Age yourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
such as medical expenses, charitable contribu-(65 or Older)
tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.
The standard deduction is higher for taxpayersIf you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
who are 65 or older or blind. If you have ato a higher standard deduction if you are age 65Examples
choice, you can use the method that gives youor older at the end of the year. You are consid-
The following examples illustrate how to deter-the lower tax. ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.
mine your standard deduction using Tables 5Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-You benefit from the standard deduc- and 6.duction for 2004 if you were born before Januarytion if your standard deduction is more2, 1940.than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, areUse Table 6 to figure the standard deductionized deductions. filing a joint return for 2004. Neither is blind.amount.
They decide not to itemize their deductions.Persons not eligible for the standard They use Table 5. Their standard deduction isdeduction. Your standard deduction is zero $9,700.Higher Standard Deduction forand you should itemize any deductions you
Blindnesshave if: Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endIf you are blind on the last day of the year and1. You are married, filing a separate return,
of 2004. Larry and Donna use Table 6. Theiryou do not itemize deductions, you are entitledand your spouse itemizes deductions,
standard deduction is $10,650.to a higher standard deduction. Use Table 6.2. You are filing a tax return for a short taxYou qualify for this benefit if you are totally oryear because of a change in your annual Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a jointpartly blind.accounting period, or return for 2004. Both are over age 65. Neither isPartly blind.If you are partly blind, you mustblind. If they do not itemize deductions, they use3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alienget a certified statement from an eye doctor orTable 6. Their standard deduction is $11,600.during the year. You are considered aregistered optometrist that:dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-
dent and resident alien during the year.
Page 18

Page 19 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are married filling a separate return and your spouse2004 Standard Deduction Tables
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.CAUTION
!
Table 5. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table 7. Standard Deduction Worksheet forYour Standard Dependents*If Your Filing Status is... Deduction is:
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number ofSingle or Married filing separately $4,850
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing jointly or Qualifying
You 65 or older Blind widow(er) with dependent child 9,700
Your spouse, if claiming 65 or older Blind Head of household 7,150
spouse’s exemption*Do not use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, or if someone else can
claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing jointly). Use Table 6Total number of boxes you checked 
or 7 instead.
1. Enter your earned income (defined1.
below). If none, enter –0–.
2. Additional amount 2. $250
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $800
Table 6. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age 65
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4.5.or Older or Blind*
6. Enter the amount shown below forCheck the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
your filing status.chart.
You 65 or older Blind • Single or Married filing separately—
Your spouse, if claiming 65 or older Blind $4,850 6.
spouse’s exemption
• Married filing jointly or QualifyingTotal number of boxes you checked widow(er) with dependent child—
$9,700AND the Number THEN
in the Box Your • Head of household—$7,150Above is: Standard
IF Your Deduction 7. Standard deduction.Filing Status is: is:
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. IfSingle 1 $6,050 under 65 and not blind, stop here.
2 7,250 This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.Married filing jointly 1 10,650
 or Qualifying 2 11,600 b. If 65 or older or blind, multiply $1,200
($950 if married or qualifyingwidow(er) with 3 12,550
widow(er) with dependent child) bydependent child 4 13,500
the number in the box above. 7b.Married filing 1 5,800
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is yourseparately 2 6,750 standard deduction for 2004. 7c.3 7,700
4 8,650
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
Head of household 1 8,350 other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
2 9,550 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.*If someone can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table 7, instead. *Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
If an exemption for you (or your spouse if youExample 1. Michael is single. His parentsStandard Deduction for
claim an exemption for him on their 2004 taxare married filing jointly) can be claimed onDependents return. He has interest income of $780 andsomeone else’s return, use Table 7 to determine
wages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.your standard deduction.The standard deduction for an individual for
Michael uses Table 7 to find his standard deduc-whom an exemption can be claimed on anotherEarned income defined.Earned income is tion. He enters $150 (his earned income) on lineperson’s tax return is generally limited to thesalaries, wages, tips, professional fees and1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $800 (thegreater of:
other amounts received as pay for work yoularger of $400 and $800) on line 5, and $4,850
1. $800, or actually perform. on line 6. The amount of his standard deduction,
on line 7a, is $800 (the smaller of $800 and2. The individual’s earned income for the For purposes of the standard deduction,
$4,850).year plus $250 (but not more than the reg-earned income also includes any part of a schol-
ular standard deduction amount, generallyarship or fellowship grant that you must include
$4,850). in your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publica-Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time
tion 970 for more information on what qualifiescollege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2004However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind,
the standard deduction may be higher. as a scholarship or fellowship grant. tax return. Joe is married and files a separate
Page 19

Page 20 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return. His wife does not itemize deductions on If you decide to itemize your deductions, For more information, see Publication 1546,
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS—her separate return.
1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, lineHow To Get Help With Unresolved TaxJoe has $1,500 in interest income and
28, on Form 1040, line 39. Problems.wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-
tions. Joe finds his standard deduction by usingElecting to itemize for state tax or otherFree tax services.To find out what servicesTable 7. He enters his earned income, $3,800,purposes. Even if your itemized deductionsare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toon line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and entersare less than the amount of your standard de-Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax$4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he enters $4,050, theduction, you can elect to itemize deductions onpublications and an index of tax topics. It alsolarger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is married filingyour federal return rather than take the standarddescribes other free tax information services,a separate return, he enters $4,850 on line 6. Ondeduction. You may want to do this, for example,including tax education and assistance pro-line 7a he enters $4,050 as his standard deduc-if the tax benefit of being able to itemize yourgrams and a list of TeleTax topics.tion because it is smaller than $4,850, thedeductions on your state tax return is greateramount on line 6. Internet. You can access the IRS web-than the tax benefit you lose on your federal
site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, atreturn by not taking the standard deduction. ToExample 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed www.irs.gov to:make this election, you must enter “IE” (itemizedon her parents’ 2004 tax return. She is 18 yearselected) on the dotted line next to line 39 (Form• E-file your return. Find out about commer-old and blind. She has interest income of $1,3001040). cial tax preparation and e-file servicesand wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de- available free to eligible taxpayers.ductions. Amy uses Table 7 to find her standardChanging your mind. If you do not itemize
deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900 on • Check the status of your 2004 refund.your deductions and later find that you should
line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,150 Click on Where’s My Refund. Be sure tohave itemized — or if you itemize your deduc-
on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150, the larger wait at least 6 weeks from the date youtions and later find you should not have — you
of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single, Amy enters filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-can change your return by filing Form 1040X.
$4,850 on line 6. She enters $3,150 on line 7a. tronically). Have your 2004 tax returnMarried persons who filed separateThis is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 and available because you will need to knowreturns. You can change methods of taking6. Because she checked one box in the top part your filing status and the exact whole dol-deductions only if you and your spouse bothof the worksheet, she enters $1,200 on line 7b. lar amount of your refund.make the same changes. Both of you must file aShe then adds the amounts on lines 7a and 7b • Download forms, instructions, and publica-consent to assessment for any additional taxand enters her standard deduction of $4,350 on tions.either one may owe as a result of the change.line 7c. You and your spouse can use the method • Order IRS products online.that gives you the lower total tax, even thoughWho Should Itemize • Research your tax questions online.one of you may pay more tax than you would
have paid by using the other method. You both• Search publications online by topic orYou should itemize deductions if your total de-must use the same method of claiming deduc- keyword.ductions are more than the standard deductiontions. If one itemizes deductions, the otheramount. Also, you should itemize if you do not • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)should itemize because he or she will not qualifyqualify for the standard deduction, as discussed published in the last few years.for the standard deduction (see Persons notearlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-eligible for the standard deduction, earlier). • Figure your withholding allowances usingdard deduction.
our Form W-4 calculator.You should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your standard • Sign up to receive local and national tax
deduction to make sure you are using the news by email.How To Get Tax Helpmethod that gives you the greater benefit. • Get information on starting and operating
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,You may be subject to a limit on some a small business.
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-of your itemized deductions if your ad-
tions, and get more information from the IRS injusted gross income (AGI) is more thanCAUTION
!
several ways. By selecting the method that is$142,700 ($71,350 if you are married filing sep- Fax. You can get over 100 of the mostbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-arately). See the instructions for Schedule A requested forms and instructions 24cess to tax help.(Form 1040), line 28, for more information on hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.figuring the correct amount of your itemized de- Just call 703-368-9694 from the telephone con-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If youductions. nected to your fax machine. When you call, youhave attempted to deal with an IRS problemwill hear instructions on how to use the service.When to itemize. You may benefit from unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-The items you request will be faxed to you.itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form payer Advocate.
For help with transmission problems, callThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-1040) if you:
703-487-4608.resents your interests and concerns within the
Long-distance charges may apply.1. Do not qualify for the standard deduction,IRS by protecting your rights and resolving
or the amount you can claim is limited,problems that have not been fixed through nor- Phone. Many services are available bymal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-2. Had large uninsured medical and dental phone.not change the tax law or make a technical taxexpenses during the year, decision, they can clear up problems that re-
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home, • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to orderyour case is given a complete and impartial4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi- current-year forms, instructions, and publi-review.ness expenses or other miscellaneous de- cations and prior-year forms and instruc-To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:ductions, tions. You should receive your order within• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at5. Had large uninsured casualty or theft 10 days.1-877-777-4778.losses, • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate6. Made large contributions to qualified chari- your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.office in your area.ties, or • Solving problems. You can get• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a7. Have total itemized deductions that are face-to-face help solving tax problemsTTY/TDD user.more than the standard deduction to which every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-
you otherwise are entitled. • Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
Page 20

Page 21 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery Eastern Area Distribution Center
your account, or help you set up a pay- stores, copy centers, city and county gov-P.O. Box 85074
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-ernment offices, credit unions, and officeRichmond, VA 23261-5074
tance Center for an appointment. To find supply stores have a collection of products
the number, go to available to print from a CD-ROM or pho- CD-ROM for tax products. You canwww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also, order Publication 1796, IRS Federalphone book under United States Govern- some IRS offices and libraries have the Tax Products CD-ROM, and obtain:ment, Internal Revenue Service. Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access lications.Bulletins available for research purposes.to TTY/TDD equipment, call
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to • Prior-year forms and instructions.• Services. You can walk in to your local
order forms and publications. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- • Frequently requested tax forms that may
ness day to ask tax questions or get help• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and be filled in electronically, printed out forwith a tax problem. An employee can ex-press 2 to listen to pre-recorded submission, or saved for recordkeeping.plain IRS letters, request adjustments tomessages covering various tax topics.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.your account, or help you set up a pay-
• Refund information. If you would like to ment plan. You can set up an appointment
check the status of your 2004 refund, call Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-by calling your local Center and, at the1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto- formation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/prompt, leaving a message requestingmated refund information or call Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-cdorders for $22 (no handling fee) or call1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6tative will call you back within 2 business1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD-ROM forweeks from the date you filed your returndays to schedule an in-person appoint-$22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first release is(3 weeks if you filed electronically). Havement at your convenience. To find theavailable in early January and the final release isyour 2004 tax return available because number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontactsavailable in late February.you will need to know your filing status or look in the phone book under Unitedand the exact whole dollar amount of yourStates Government, Internal Revenue CD-ROM for small businesses. Pub-refund. Service. lication 3207, The Small Business Re-
source Guide, CD-ROM 2004, is a
Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv- must for every small business owner or anyMail. You can send your order for
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give taxpayer about to start a business. This handy,forms, instructions, and publications to
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, the Distribution Center nearest to youinteractive CD contains all the business tax
we use several methods to evaluate the qualityand receive a response within 10 business daysforms, instructions, and publications needed to
of our telephone services. One method is for aafter your request is received. Use the addresssuccessfully manage a business. In addition, thesecond IRS representative to sometimes listenthat applies to your part of the country.CD provides other helpful information, such asin on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-• Western part of U.S.:some callers to complete a short survey at the ing for your business, and much more. The de-Western Area Distribution Centerend of the call.
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001 sign of the CD makes finding information easy
and quick and incorporates file formats and• Central part of U.S.:Walk-in. Many products and services browsers that can be run on virtually anyCentral Area Distribution Centerare available on a walk-in basis.
desktop or laptop computer.P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903 It is available in early April. You can get a• Products. You can walk in to many post free copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visit-• Eastern part of U.S. and foreignoffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up
ing www.irs.gov/smallbiz.certain forms, instructions, and publica-addresses:
Page 21

Page 22 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Child custody: Dual-status taxpayers:AD
Exemptions................. 9Support test forAbroad, citizens traveling or Death of dependent .......... 7
Joint returns not available.... 6dependents.............. 1 5working: Death of spouse............5 ,  6
Child support: (See also SupportFiling requirements.......... 3 Decedents: (See also Death of
test for dependents)........ 1 2Absence, temporary.......... 8 spouse)..................... 5EHome jointly owned........ 1 7 Filing requirements.......... 3Accounting periods: Earned income:Paid in later year........... 1 7Deductions (See StandardJoint returns................ 5 Defined for purposes ofParents who never deduction)Adoption: standard deduction....... 1 9married.................. 1 7Dependents:Citizen or residency test.... 1 1 Dependent filing requirementsRemarried parent........... 1 7 Born and died within (Table 2)................. 3Member of household Third party support......... 1 7 year..................... 1 7test...................... 1 1 Earned income credit:Child tax credit: Child’s earnings: (See alsoTaxpayer identification Advance filing requirementsEligibility................... 1 0 Children, subheading:number .................. 1 8 (Table 3)................. 4Children: Investment income of childAdvance earned income credit: Elderly persons:Adoption (See Adoption) under age 14)...........2 ,  4Home for the aged......... 1 3Filing requirements (Table Birth of child: Citizen or residency test.... 1 1 Standard deduction for age 653 ) ........................ 4 Head of household, qualifyingEarned income.............. 4 or older.................. 1 8Age: person to file as......... 7 Exemptions................. 9Equitable relief:Filing status Widow(er) with dependent Who can claim (Figure Innocent spouse relief....... 5determination............. 3 child, qualifying person to A )..................... 1 0Exemptions ...............9-18Gross income and filing file as.................. 9 Filing requirements.......... 4 Amount:requirements (Table 1).... 2 Claiming parent, when child is Earned income, unearned What’s New for 2004...... 1Standard deduction for age 65 head of household........ 7 income, and gross income Deduction for exemptions,or older.................. 1 8Custody of, support test for levels (Table 2)......... 3 determination of (Worksheetdependents.............. 1 5Support test for Gross income test.......... 1 1 2 ) ....................... 1 7Death of child:dependents.............. 1 3 Joint return test............ 1 1 Dependents (See Dependents)Head of household, qualifyingAliens: Member of household or Dual-status taxpayers....... 9person to file as......... 7Dual-status (See Dual-status relationship test.......... 1 1 How to claim................ 9Widow(er) with dependenttaxpayers) Multiple support Nonresident aliens.......... 9child, qualifying person toNonresident (See Nonresident agreement............... 1 5 Personal (See Personalfile as.................. 9aliens) Social Security Number..... 1 7 exemption)Definition of................ 1 2 Adoption taxpayerAlternative minimum tax (AMT): Phaseout ................1 ,  1 7Dividends of (See this heading: identificationFiling requirements (Table Types of.................... 9Investment income of child number ................ 1 83 ) ........................ 4 U.S. citizen or resident....... 9under age 14) Alien dependents........ 1 8Amended returns: (See also Exemption for dependents (See Standard deduction for..... 1 9Form 1040X).............7 ,  2 0Dependents) Earned income FChange from itemized to Filing requirements as defined................ 1 9Fair rental value:standard deduction (or vice dependents (Table 2)...... 3 Worksheet (Table 8)...... 1 9 Support test forversa)................... 2 0Investment income of child Support test................ 1 2 dependents.............. 1 4American citizens abroad.... 3 under age 14...........2 ,  4Support, worksheet for Figures (See Tables and figures)Annulled marriages: Dependent filing requirements determining.............. 1 2Filing requirements:Filing status................. 5 (Table 2)............... 3 Tests to claim.............. 1 1 Citizens outside U.S......... 3Armed forces: Interest and dividends..... 4 Unearned income........... 4 Deceased taxpayer.......... 3Parents’ election to report onCombat zone, signing return for Disabilities, persons with: Dependents................. 4Form 8814............2 ,  4spouse ................... 6 Dependency exemption, gross Table 2................... 3Social Security Number..... 1 7Dependency allotments..... 1 2 income test for........... 1 2 Generally (Table 1).......... 2Stillborn................... 1 0Military quarters Divorced taxpayers: Gross income levels (TableSupport of (See Child support)allotments............... 1 2 Child custody: 1 ) ........................ 2Church employees:Tuition payments and Support test for dependents Other situations requiring filingFiling requirements (Tableallowances under GI (Figure B)............. 1 7 (Table 3)................. 43 ) ........................ 4Bill...................... 1 4 Support test for Penalty for failure to file...... 2Citizen or residency test..... 1 1Assistance (See Tax help) dependents............ 1 5 Puerto Rico, residents of..... 3Adopted child.............. 1 1ATINs (Adoption taxpayer Dependent support test (Figure What’s New for 2004........ 1Children’s place ofidentification B ) ....................... 1 7Who must file........ 1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4residence................ 1 1numbers) ................. 1 8 Dependent support test..... 1 5Filing status................ 4 - 9Foreign student’s place of Post-1984 divorce decree or Age 65 and older............ 3residence................ 1 1 separation Annulled marriages.......... 5Citizens outside U.S.:B agreement............. 1 5 Change to:Filing requirements.......... 3Birth of dependent........... 7 Filing status................. 5 Joint return after separateComments on publication.... 2Blind persons: Divorce and remarriage to returns................. 7
Common law marriage ....... 5Standard deduction for..... 1 8 same person............ 5 Separate returns after joint
Community property states: Joint returns, responsibility return................7 ,  8
Married filing separately, f o r........................ 5Determination of..........3 ,  4
C treatment of income....... 7 Relief from................ 5 Divorced taxpayers (See
Canada, resident of.......9 ,  1 1 Personal exemption......... 9Cousin ...................... 1 1 Divorced taxpayers)
Child care: Domestic help:Custody: Head of household.......... 5
Support test for Support test for Dependent exemption not Marital status, determination
dependents.............. 1 4 dependents.............. 1 5 applicable............... 1 0 o f ........................ 5
Page 22

Page 23 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing status (Cont.) Group-term life insurance: Medical savings accountsJ
Married filing jointly (See Joint (MSAs):Uncollected social security/ Joint returns:
returns) Filing requirements (TableMedicare taxes: Accounting period........... 5
3 ) ........................ 4Married filing separately (See Reporting of (Table 3)..... 4 Death of spouse during
Married filing separately) Member of household oryear...................... 5
relationship test........... 1 1Unmarried persons (See Single Dependency exemption..... 1 1
H Adoption................... 1 1taxpayers) Divorced taxpayers.......... 5
Authorized placementHead of household:Food stamps ................ 1 3 Filing status................. 5
agency .................. 1 1Considered unmarried....... 7Foreign employment: Guardian of spouse, signing
Cousin..................... 1 1Cost of keeping up home.... 7 a s........................ 6Citizens outside U.S., filing
Death or birth.............. 1 1How to file and forms........ 5Filing requirements (Tablerequirements.............. 3
Foster child................ 1 11 ) ........................ 2Innocent spouse............ 5Foreign students: Joint return................ 1 1Member of householdHow to file.................. 7Citizen or residency test.... 1 1 Local law violated.......... 1 1test...................... 1 1Nonresident alien spouse.... 7Form 1040: Relatives who do not have toNonresident or dual-status alienPersonal exemption......... 9Personal exemption......... 9 live with you............. 1 1spouse ................... 6Qualifying person to fileSocial Security Numbers.... 1 7 Temporary absences....... 1 1Personal exemption......... 9a s......................5 ,  7Use of....................5 ,  6 Mexico, resident of........9 ,  1 1Responsibility for............ 5Qualifying surviving spouse withForm 1040, Schedule A: Military (See Armed forces)Signing..................... 6dependent child.........5 ,  8Itemized deduction limit..... 2 0 Missing children:Health insurance:Form 1040A: Photographs of, included in IRSPremiums ofPersonal exemption......... 9 K publications............... 2dependents.............. 1 4Social Security Numbers.... 1 7 Kidnapped children: More information (See Tax help)Help (See Tax help)Use of....................5 ,  6 Head of household status Multiple supportHome:Form 1040EZ: a n d ...................... 8agreement ................ 1 5Aged, home for............. 1 3Personal exemption......... 9 Personal exemption......... 9
Cost of keeping up.......... 7Use of...................... 5 Widow(er) with dependent
Jointly owned.............. 1 7 Nchild...................... 9Form 1040X:
Household workers: Night school:Change of filing status....... 7
Dependent exemption not Dependency exemption, testItemized deduction, change to Lapplicable............... 1 0 f o r....................... 1 2standard deduction....... 2 0
Limit on itemizedHousing: Noncustodial parent......... 1 5Standard deduction, change to
deductions................ 2 0Military quartersitemized deductions...... 2 0 Nonresident aliens........... 2
What’s New for 2004........ 1allotments............... 1 2 Dependents................ 1 8Form 8332:
Local income taxes: Exemptions................. 9Written declaration releasing
Itemized deductions........ 2 0 Spouse ..................... 7child exemption to I Lodging: Earned income credit...... 7noncustodial parent...... 1 5Important changes: Support test forForm 8814: Standard deduction.......... 1 dependents.............. 1 4Parents’ election to report OIncome: Losses:child’s interest and
Overseas taxpayers.......... 3Tax exempt................ 1 2 Rental real estatedividends...............2 ,  4
activities.................. 6Individual retirementForm 8857:
arrangements (IRAs):Innocent spouse relief....... 6 PFiling requirements (TableForm SS-5: M Parent:3 ) ........................ 4Social Security Number Head of household, claimMarital status:Married filing separately..... 6request.................. 1 7 f o r........................ 7Determination of............ 5Individual taxpayerForm W-7: Penalties:Married filing jointly (See Jointidentification numbersIndividual taxpayer identification Failure to file................ 2returns)(ITINs)..................... 1 8number request.......... 1 8 Personal exemption.......... 9Married filing separately:Innocent spouse relief:Form W-7A: Deceased spouse........... 9Changing method from or toForm 8857 .................. 6Adoption taxpayer identification Divorced or separateditemized deductions...... 2 0Joint returns................ 5number request.......... 1 8 spouse ................... 9Community propertyInsurance premiums:Foster care: Head of household.......... 9states.................... 7Health insurance........... 1 4Dependency exemption for: How to claim................ 9Filing status................. 6IRAs (See Individual retirementMember of household Joint return................. 9Change to................ 7arrangements (IRAs))test................... 1 1 Phaseout ................... 1How to file.................. 6Itemized deductions:Support test............. 1 3 Separate return............. 9Individual retirement
‘‘IE’’ entered on Form Spouse’s exemption......... 9Free tax services............ 2 0 arrangements (IRAs)...... 6
1040 .................... 2 0 What’s New for 2004........ 1Itemized deductions........ 2 0
Changing from standard to Who cannot claim........... 9Personal exemption......... 9
itemized deduction (or viceG Phaseout of exemptions...... 1Rental activity losses........ 6
versa)................... 2 0GI Bill: Special rules................ 6Photographs:
Choosing to itemize........ 2 0Support test for Missing children, included inMarried taxpayers: (See also
Limits on.................1 ,  2 0dependents.............. 1 4 IRS publications........... 2Joint returns)................ 5
What’s New for 2004...... 1Gross income: Age 65 or older spouse, Publications (See Tax help)
Married filing separately.... 2 0Defined..................3 ,  1 1 standard deduction....... 1 8Puerto Rico:
Standard deduction to beFiling requirements (Table Blind spouse, standard Residents of................ 3
compared with........... 2 01 ) ...................... 2 deduction................ 1 8
State tax, for............... 2 0 Dual-status alien spouse..... 6Dependency exemption, test
QFiling status................. 5f o r....................... 1 1When to itemize............ 2 0
Qualifying person............ 7Dependent filing requirements Medical insurance:ITINs (Individual taxpayer
(Table 2)................. 3 Premiums ofidentification Qualifying widow/widower (See
dependents.............. 1 4numbers) ................. 1 8Self-employed persons...... 3 Surviving spouse)
Page 23

Page 24 of 24 of Publication 501 16:22 - 19-OCT-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Innocent spouse relief....... 5 Tax exempt income........ 1 2Tax-exempt income ......... 1 2R
Nonresident alien........... 7 Total support............... 1 3Taxpayer Advocate.......... 2 0Recapture taxes.............. 4
Signing joint returns......... 6 Capital expenses......... 1 4Tests to claimRelationship test............ 1 1
Surviving (See Surviving Child care expenses ...... 1 4 dependents ............... 1 1Remarriage after divorce..... 5 spouse) Fair rental value Tips:Rental income and expenses: defined................ 1 4SSNs  (See Social Security Reporting of (Table 3)....... 4Losses from rental real estate Items not included........ 1 4Numbers (SSNs)) Total support................ 1 3activities.................. 6 Living with someone rentStandard deduction......18-20 TTY/TDD information........ 2 0Residency: free................... 1 42004 changes.............. 1 9Dependency exemption test Tuition:Lodging ................. 1 4Age 65 or older............. 1 8(See Citizen or residency GI Bill, payments andMedical insurance........ 1 4Amount .................... 1 8test) allowances under........ 1 4Person living in ownBlind persons.............. 1 8
home .................. 1 4Changing from itemized to
Property................. 1 4S Ustandard deduction (or vice
Tuition payments andScholarships.......... 4 ,  12, 19 U.S. citizens abroad:versa)................... 2 0
allowances under GI Filing requirements.......... 3Comparison with itemizedSchool defined.............. 1 2
Bill.................... 1 4deduction amount........ 2 0 U.S. possessions:Self-employed persons: Year support provided...... 1 2Dependents................ 1 9 Income from................ 4Filing requirements (Table
Surviving spouse:Earned income defined..... 1 93 ) ........................ 4 Unearned income of child (See
Death of spouse (See Death ofMarried filing jointly.......... 5Gross income............... 3 Children, subheading:
spouse)Persons not eligible........ 1 8 Investment income of childSeparate returns (See Married Gross income filingTables and figures.......... 1 9 under age 14)filing separately) requirements (Table 1).... 2What’s New for 2004........ 1 Unmarried persons (See SingleSeparated taxpayers: Widow(er) with dependentState or local income taxes: taxpayers)Dependent support test (Figure child...................... 8Itemized deductions........ 2 0B ) ....................... 1 7 Death or birth of child...... 9Students:Dependent support test..... 1 5 VEligibility rules............ 8Definition of................ 1 2Post-1984 divorce decree or Vocational high schoolHow to file................ 8Dependency exemptionseparation students:Kidnapped child........... 9test...................... 1 2agreement............. 1 5 Dependency exemption, testForeign students, citizen orFiling status................. 5 f o r....................... 1 2residency test............ 1 1TLiving apart but not legally
Full-time student defined.... 1 2separated................. 5 Tables and figures: (See also
Night school............... 1 2 WPersonal exemption......... 9 Worksheets)............... 1 2
School defined............. 1 2 Welfare benefits............. 1 3Dependent exemption, who canSignatures:
Vocational high school claim (Figure A).......... 1 0Joint returns................ 6 What’s New for 2004:
students................. 1 2Filing requirements: Exemption amount.......... 1Single taxpayers:
Suggestions for Dependents (Table 2)..... 3 Exemption phaseout......... 1Filing status................. 5
publication................. 2 Gross income levels (Table Limit on itemizedGross income filing
Support test for 1 ) ...................... 2 deduction................. 1requirements (Table 1).... 2
dependents ............... 1 2 Other situations requiring Who must file............... 1How to file and forms........ 5
Aged, home for............. 1 3 filing (Table 3).......... 4Personal exemption......... 9 Widow/widower  (See Surviving
Armed forces.............. 1 2 Head of household, qualifying spouse)Social security and Medicare
Child’s wages used for own person (Table 4).......... 8taxes: Worksheets:
support.................. 1 2Standard deduction:Reporting of (Table 3)....... 4 Deduction for exemptions,
Divorced or separated parents, Age 65 or older or blind determination of.......... 1 7Social security benefits: child of.................. 1 5 (Table 7).............. 1 9 Head of household status andDependency exemption support Figure B................. 1 7 Dependents, worksheet for cost of keeping uptest...................... 1 2Foster care payments and (Table 8).............. 1 9 home ..................... 7Social Security Numbers expenses ................ 1 3 Most people (Table 6).... 1 9 Standard deduction......... 1 9(SSNs): How to determine if test Tax help..................... 2 0Support test forChild’s..................... 1 7 m e t ..................... 1 2Tax returns: dependents.............. 1 2Dependents................ 1 7 Own funds used for Amended (See Form 1040X)Spouse: (See also Joint ■support.................. 1 2Filing of (See Filingreturns)..................... 5 Social security benefit requirements)Deceased .................6 ,  9 payments ................ 1 2 Joint returns (See Joint returns)Dual-status alien spouse..... 6 State-provided support..... 1 3 Who must file........ 1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4Exemption for............... 9
Page 24