Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P17.SGM ( 6-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\jx3db\documents\Pub 17\P17-corrected.sgm
Page 1 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2005Revenue
Service
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What’s New for 2005.................... 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
What’s New for 2006.................... 1 20 Standard Deduction................ 131
21 Medical and Dental Expenses......... 134
Reminders ........................... 2 22 Taxes ......................... 140
23 Interest Expense.................. 144Introduction.......................... 3 24 Contributions.................... 151
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and TheftPart One. The Income Tax Return Losses ........................ 1601 Filing Information.................. 4 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee2 Filing Status..................... 19 Business Expenses............... 1663 Personal Exemptions and Dependents . . .24 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax..... 34 Education...................... 184
28 Miscellaneous Deductions........... 189Part Two. Income
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions......... 1965 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings.... 42
6 Tip Income...................... 50 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Interest Income................... 52 30 How To Figure Your Tax............ 1988 Dividends and Other Corporate 31 Tax on Investment Income of CertainDistributions.................... 60 Minor Children................... 2019 Rental Income and Expenses......... 64 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit....... 20810 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled.... 217Annuities...................... 70 34 Child Tax Credit.................. 22111 Social Security and Equivalent 35 Education Credits................. 225Railroad Retirement Benefits......... 76 36 Earned Income Credit.............. 23212 Other Income.................... 80 37 Other Credits.................... 246
Part Three. Gains and Losses 2005 Tax Table........................ 25013 Basis of Property................. 89
14 Sale of Property.................. 94 2005 Tax Rate Schedules................ 26215 Selling Your Home................ 100
16 Reporting Gains and Losses.......... 105 2005 Tax Computation Worksheet.......... 263
Part Four. Adjustments to Income Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 264
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ........................ 112 How To Get Tax Help................... 265
18 Alimony........................ 124
19 Education-Related Adjustments........ 127 Index ............................... 266
Order Blank
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2005) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What’s New for 2005
This section summarizes important• Child tax credit. See chapter $10,000 ($12,000 if you were ageExemption amount. You are
34. 50 or older).tax changes that took effect in allowed a $3,200 deduction for
IRA deduction expanded. The2005. Most of these changes are each exemption to which you are• Earned income credit (EIC).amount you, and your spouse if fil-discussed in more detail through- entitled. However, your exemptionSee chapter 36. ing jointly, may be able to deduct asout this publication. amount could be phased out if youan IRA contribution will increase toChanges are also discussed in have high income. See chapter 3.Standard mileage rates. The $4,000 ($4,500 if age 50 or older atPublication 553, Highlights of 2005standard mileage rate for the costthe end of 2005). See chapter 17.Limit on itemized deduction.Tax Changes. of operating your car increased to Some of your itemized deductions40.5 cents a mile for all businessContributions.If you donate aKatrina Emergency Tax Relief may be limited if your adjustedmiles driven before September 1,car, boat, or airplane or a patent orAct of 2005. This Act provides gross income is more than2005. For business miles driven af-other intellectual property to a qual-tax relief for persons affected by $145,950 ($72,975 if you are mar-ter August 31, 2005, the rate in-ified organization, your deductionHurricane Katrina. The provisions ried filing separately). See chaptercreased to 48.5 cents a mile. Seemay be limited. See chapter 24.of the Act are explained in Publica-chapter 26. 29.tion 4492. Domestic production activitiesThe standard mileage rate al- Tax benefits for adoption.deduction. There is a new de-At the time this publica-lowed for use of your car for medi- The adoption credit and the maxi-duction for domestic production ac-tion went to print, Con-cal reasons increased to 15 centstivities. This deduction can bemum exclusion from income ofgress was considering for miles driven before SeptemberCAUTION
!
passed to you from a business. Forlegislation that would provide addi- benefits under an employer’s adop-1, 2005, and to 22 cents for milesmore information, see Form 8903.tional tax relief for individuals af- tion assistance program are in-driven after August 31, 2005. See
fected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,chapter 21. creased to $10,630. See AdoptionDisaster mitigation payments.and Wilma. For more details, and toThe standard mileage rate al- Credit in chapter 37.You may be able to exclude fromfind out if this legislation was en-lowed for use of your car for deter-income grants you use to mitigateHope or lifetime learningacted, see Pub. 4492. mining moving expenses (reduce the severity of) potentialcredit income limits increased.increased to 15 cents for milesdamage from future natural disas-Telefile no longer available. The amount of income you candriven before September 1, 2005,ters that is paid to you through stateYou no longer can use Telefile to have and still receive a Hope orand to 22 cents for miles drivenand local governments. If you re-file your tax return. There are other lifetime learning credit has in-after August 31, 2005. See Publi-ported income from qualified disas-IRS e-file options you can use. Seecation 521. creased. See chapter 37.ter mitigation payments in previouschapter 1. years, you may be able to file a Social security and MedicareRetirement savings plans. The claim for refund. See chapter 12.Automatic six month extension taxes. The maximum wages sub-following paragraphs highlightto file tax return.You can now changes that affect individual re- ject to social security tax (6.2%)Certain amounts increased.use Form 4868, Application for Au-tirement arrangements (IRAs) and increased to $90,000. All wagesSome tax items that are indexed fortomatic Extension of Time To Filepension plans. inflation increased for 2005. are subject to Medicare taxU.S. Individual Income Tax Return,Traditional IRA income limits. Earned income credit (EIC). (1.45%).to obtain an automatic 6-month ex-If you have a traditional IRA andThe maximum amount of incometension of time to file your tax re-are covered by a retirement plan at Mailing your return.If you areyou can earn and still get EIC in-turn. See chapter 1. work, the amount of income you creased. The amount depends on filing a paper return, you may be
can have and not be affected by theyour filing status and number ofmailing your return to a differentNew definition of a qualifying deduction phaseout increases. Thechildren. The maximum amount ofaddress because the IRS haschild. A new definition of a “quali-amounts vary depending on filinginvestment income you can havefying child” applies for each of the changed the filing location for sev-status. See chapter 17. and still be eligible for the credit hasfollowing tax benefits. eral areas. If you received an en-Limit on elective deferrals.increased to $2,700. See chaptervelope with your tax package,• Head of household filing sta-The maximum amount of elective 36. please use it. Otherwise, seetus. See chapter 2. deferrals under a salary reductionStandard deduction.  The Where to File near the end of thisagreement that could be contrib- standard deduction for taxpayers• Dependency exemption. See publication for a list of IRS ad-uted to a qualified plan increased to who do not itemize deductions onchapter 3. dresses.$14,000 ($18,000 if you were age Schedule A (Form 1040) has in-
• Child and dependent care 50 or older). However, for SIMPLE creased. The amount depends on
credit. See chapter 32. plans, the amount increased to your filing status. See chapter 20.
■
What’s New for 2006
This section summarizes the im- changes that affect individual re-plans, the amount is $10,000 Itemized deductions.  The
tirement arrangements (IRAs) and phaseout of the limitation on item-($12,500 if you are age 50 orportant changes that take effect in
pension plans. ized deductions will be reduced byolder).2006 that could affect your esti-
Traditional IRA income limits. 1/3.mated tax payments for 2006. IRA catch-up contribution.
If you have a traditional IRA, areMore information on these and The catch-up contribution for per-Alternative technology vehicles.covered by a retirement plan atother changes can be found in Pub- sons age 50 or older at the end ofYou may be able to take a credit ifwork, and are married filing jointlylication 553. 2006 is increased to $1,000. Theyou place an alternative technologyor a qualifying widow(er), the maximum contribution for such per-vehicle in service during the year.Energy credits. You may be amount of income you can have son is $5,000. See chapter 37. You no longer canable to claim a new tax credit forand not be affected by the deduc- take a deduction for clean-fuel ve-tion phaseout increases. The Alternative minimum tax (AMT).the purchase of qualified energy ef- hicles.amounts for other filing statusesThe AMT exemption amount willficiency improvements to your ex-
are not changed. decrease. The amount depends onisting home. You may be able to
Limit on elective deferrals.your filing status.claim a tax credit for the purchase
The maximum amount of electiveof residential solar water heating, Phaseouts reduced.deferrals under a salary reductionphotovoltaic equipment, or fuel cell
Personal exemptions.  Theagreement that can be contributedproperty. phaseout of the limitation on per-to a qualified plan increases to
Retirement savings plans. The sonal exemptions will be reduced$15,000 ($20,000 if you are age 50
following paragraphs highlight or older). However, for SIMPLE by 1/3.
■

Page 4 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- If you reside outside the UnitedInclude your phone number on ing extensions) to get that refund.
ers and other items that may helpStates, you may be able to excludeyour return.To promptly resolveSee chapter 1.
you file your 2005 tax return. Manypart or all of your foreign source any questions we have in process-
Privacy Act and paperwork re-of these items are explained inearned income. For details, see ing your tax return, we would like to
duction information. The IRSmore detail later in this publication.Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. be able to call you. Please enter
Restructuring and Reform Act ofCitizens and Resident Aliens your daytime telephone number on
Write in your social security 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, andyour tax form next to your signa-Abroad.number. To protect your privacy, the Paperwork Reduction Act ofture.
social security numbers (SSNs) areEarned income credit.You can 1980 require that when we ask you
not printed on the peel-off label that Third party designee.You canchoose to include combat pay in for information we must first tell you
comes in the mail with your tax in- check the “Yes” box in the “Thirdyour earned income for purposes what our legal right is to ask for thestruction booklet. This means you Party Designee” area of your returnof computing this credit. If you are information, why we are asking formust enter your SSN in the space to authorize the IRS to discuss yourmarried, each of you can make this it, how it will be used, what couldprovided on your tax form. If you return with a friend, family member,election separately. happen if we do not receive it, andfiled a joint return for 2004 and are or any other person you choose.Form 8836.  If you received whether your response is volun-filing a joint return for 2005 with the This allows the IRS to call the per-Form 8836, Qualifying Children tary, required to obtain a benefit, orsame spouse, enter your names son you identified as your designeeResidency Statement, you have mandatory under the law. A com-and SSNs in the same order as on to answer any questions that maybeen selected to participate in the plete statement on this subject canyour 2004 return. See chapter 1. arise during the processing of yourEIC certification program. See be found in your tax form instruc-Victim of identity theft. If you return. It also allows your designeechapter 36. tion booklet.believe someone has assumed to perform certain actions. See
your identity to file federal incomeAdvance earned income credit. chapter 1. Customer service for taxpayerstax returns, or to commit other taxIf a qualifying child lives with you expanded.  The Internal Reve-Payment of taxes. Make yourfraud, call 1-800-829-0433. Victimsand you expect to qualify for the nue Service has expanded cus-check or money order payable toof identity theft who are havingearned income credit in 2006, you tomer service for taxpayers.“United States Treasury.” You cantrouble filing their returns shouldmay be able to get part of the credit Through the agency’s Everydaypay your taxes by credit card, usingcall the IRS Taxpayer Advocatespaid to you in advance throughout Tax Solutions service, you can setthe Electronic Federal Tax Pay-Office at 1-877-777-4778. You the year (by your employer) instead up a personal appointment at thement System (EFTPS), or, if youshould also know that the IRS doesof waiting until you file your tax re- most convenient Taxpayer Assis-file electronically, by electronicnot initiate communication with tax-turn. See chapter 36. tance Center, on the most conve-funds withdrawal. See chapter 1.payers through email. If you do re- nient business day. See How ToSales tax deduction. You canceive this type of request, it may be Faster ways to file your return.Get Tax Help in the back of thischoose to deduct state and localan attempt by identity thieves to get The IRS offers fast, accurate wayspublication.general sales taxes instead of stateyour private tax information. to file your tax return informationand local income taxes as an item- Treasury Inspector General forwithout filing a paper tax return.Taxpayer identification ized deduction on Form 1040, Tax Administration.If you wantYou can use IRS e-file (electronicnumbers. You must provide the Schedule A. See chapter 22. filing). See chapter 1. to confidentially report misconduct,taxpayer identification number for
waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSTax Computation Worksheet. Ifeach person for whom you claim Free electronic filing. You may employee, you can callyour taxable income is $100,000 orcertain tax benefits. This applies be able to file your 2005 taxes on-1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877- 8339more, figure your tax using the Taxeven if the person was born in line for free thanks to an electronicComputation Worksheet. The Tax for TTY/TDD users). You can re-2005. Generally, this number is the filing agreement. See chapter 1.Computation Worksheet is found main anonymous.person’s social security number
near the end of this publication im-(SSN). See chapter 1. Change of address. If you Photographs of missingmediately following the Tax Ratechange your address, you shouldchildren. The Internal RevenueForeign source income. If you Schedules. (The Tax Rate Sched-notify the IRS. See Change of Ad-are a U.S. citizen with income from Service is a proud partner with theules are shown so you can see thedress, under What Happens After Isources outside the United States National Center for Missing andtax rate that applies to all levels ofFile, in chapter 1.(foreign income), you must report Exploited Children. Photographs oftaxable income. Do not use the Tax
all such income on your tax return missing children selected by theRate Schedules to figure your tax.)Private delivery services.You
unless it is exempt by U.S. law. Center may appear in this publica-may be able to use a designated
Joint return responsibility.This is true whether you reside in- tion on pages that would otherwiseprivate delivery service to mail your
Generally, both spouses are re-side or outside the United States be blank. You can help bring thesetax returns and payments. See
sponsible for the tax and any inter-and whether or not you receive a children home by looking at thechapter 1.
est or penalties on a joint tax return.Form W-2 or 1099 from the foreign photographs and calling
In some cases, one spouse may bepayer. This applies to earned in- Refund on a late filed return.If 1-800-THE-LOST
relieved of that responsibility forcome (such as wages and tips) as you were due a refund but you did (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizeitems of the other spouse that werewell as unearned income (such as not file a return, you generally must a child.incorrectly reported on the joint re-interest, dividends, capital gains, file your return within 3 years from
turn. See chapter 2.pensions, rents and royalties). the date the return was due (includ- ■
Page 2

Page 5 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication covers the general  It will help you identify which filing• Recorded tax information top- We respond to many letters by
rules for filing a federal income tax status you qualify for, whether you telephone. Therefore, it would beics (TeleTax).
return. It supplements the informa- can claim any dependents, and helpful if you would include your
tion contained in your tax form in- whether the income you receive is daytime phone number, includingIf you operate your own business
struction booklet. It explains the tax taxable. The publication goes on to the area code, in your correspond-or have other self-employment in-
law to make sure you pay only the explain the standard deduction, the ence.come, such as from babysitting or
tax you owe and no more. kinds of expenses you may be able You can email us atselling crafts, see the followingto deduct, and the various kinds of *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskpublications for more information.How this publication is ar- credits you may be able to take to must be included in the address.)ranged. This publication closelyreduce your tax. Please put “Publications Com-• Publication 334, Tax Guidefollows Form 1040, U.S. Individual ment” on the subject line. Althoughfor Small Business (For Indi-Throughout the publication areIncome Tax Return. It is divided we cannot respond individually toexamples showing how the tax law viduals Who Use Schedule Cinto six parts which cover different each email, we do appreciate yourapplies in typical situations. Sam-sections of Form 1040. Each part is or C-EZ). feedback and will consider yourple forms and schedules show youfurther divided into chapters which comments as we revise our tax• Publication 535, Business Ex-how to report certain items on yourgenerally discuss one line of the products.penses.return. Also throughout the publica-form. Do not worry if you file Form
tion are flowcharts and tables that1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything Tax questions. If you have a• Publication 587, Business
present tax information in anincluded on a line of either of these tax question, visit www.irs.gov orUse of Your Home (Including
easy-to-understand manner.forms is also included on Form call 1-800-829-1040. We cannotUse by Daycare Providers).
1040. answer tax questions at either ofMany of the subjects discussedThe table of contents inside the the addresses listed above.in this publication are discussed inHelp from the IRS. There arefront cover and the index in thegreater detail in other IRS publica- Ordering forms and publica-many ways you can get help fromback of the publication are usefultions. References to those other tions. Visit www.irs.gov/form-the IRS. These are explainedtools to help you find the informa-publications are provided for your spubs to download forms andtion you need. under How To Get Tax Help in theinformation. publications, call 1-800-829-3676,back of this publication.What is in this publication.The or write to the National DistributionIcons. Small graphic symbols,publication begins with the rules for Center at the address shown underor icons, are used to draw yourfiling a tax return. It explains: How To Get Tax Help in the back ofComments and suggestions.attention to special information. this publication.We welcome your comments aboutSee Table 1, Legend of Icons, be-1. Who must file a return, low, for an explanation of each iconthis publication and your sugges-IRS mission. Provide America’s
2. Which tax form to use, used in this publication. tions for future editions. taxpayers top quality service by
helping them understand and meet3. When the return is due, You can write to us at the fol-
their tax responsibilities and by ap-lowing address:What is not covered in this publi-4. How to e-file your return, and plying the tax law with integrity andcation. Some material that you fairness to all.5. Other general information. may find helpful is not included inInternal Revenue Servicethis publication but can be found inIndividual Forms and Publica-your tax form instruction booklet.tions BranchThis includes lists of: SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW• Where to report certain items
IR-6406shown on information docu-
Washington, DC 20224ments, and
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
! this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.TIP
■
Page 3

Page 6 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system. TheyThe Income Tax take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return— such as deciding what
your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, and what form to file.Return They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file (electronic filing),
certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax during the year: withhold-
ing and estimated tax.
Direct deposit of refund.Instead of getting aTaxpayer identification number for aliens.
If you or your dependent is a nonresident orpaper check, you may be able to have your
resident alien who does not have and is notrefund deposited directly into your account at a1. eligible to get a social security number, file Formbank or other financial institution. See Direct
W-7, Application for IRS Individual TaxpayerDeposit under Refunds, later.
Identification Number, with the IRS. For more
Alternative payment methods. If you owe information, see Social Security Number, later.Filing additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-
cally. See How To Pay, later.
Information Installment agreement.If you cannot pay theIntroductionfull amount due with your return, you may ask to
This chapter discusses:make monthly installment payments. See In-
What’s New stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You • Whether you have to file a return,Owe .
• Which form to use,Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
Service in combat zone.You are allowed ex-come you can receive before you must file a • How to file electronically,tra time to take care of your tax matters if you arereturn has been increased. See Table 1-1, Table
a member of the Armed Forces who served in a• When, how, and where to file your return,1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts.
combat zone, or if you served in the combat• What happens if you pay too little or tooTelefile no longer available.You can no zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi- much tax,longer use Telefile to file your tax return. Thereviduals Serving in Combat Zone, later, under
are other IRS e-file options that you can use. • What records you should keep and howWhen Do I Have To File.
long you should keep them, and
Automatic 6-month extension.You can now Adoption taxpayer identification number.If • How you can change a return you haveuse Form 4868, Application for Automatic Ex-a child has been placed in your home for pur-already filed.tension of Time To File U.S. Individual Incomeposes of legal adoption and you will not be ableTax Return, to obtain an automatic 6-month ex-to get a social security number for the child intension to file your tax return. time to file your return, you may be able to get an
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).Mailing your return.You may be mailing your
For more information, see Social Security Num-return to a different address this year because
ber, later.the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-
eral areas. If you received an envelope with your
tax package, please use it. Otherwise, see
Table 1-1.2005 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
Where Do I File, later in this chapter. THEN file a return if 
AND at the end of 2005 you your gross income
IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**
single under 65 $ 8,200Reminders
65 or older $ 9,450
Alternative filing methods.Rather than filingmarried filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $16,400a return on paper, you may be able to file elec-
tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per- 65 or older (one spouse) $17,400
sonal identification number (PIN) and file a 65 or older (both spouses) $18,400completely paperless tax return. For more infor-
mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on married filing separately any age $ 3,200
Paper, later.
head of household under 65 $10,500
Change of address. If you change your ad- 65 or older $11,750dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of
Address, later, under What Happens After I File. qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $13,200
If you were affected by Hurricane Katrina or Rita,
dependent child 65 or older $14,200you may be able to verbally change your ad-
dress. * If you were born on January 1, 1941, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2005.
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is not
Enter your social security number. You exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude part
must enter your social security number (SSN) inor all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless you are married filing a separate return and you
lived with your spouse at any time during 2005.the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2005 (or on the date your spouse died) and your grossa joint return, enter the SSNs in the same orderincome was at least $3,200, you must file a return regardless of your age.as the names.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 7 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To find out whether you must file, see TableTable 1-2.2005 Filing Requirements for Dependents
1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no tableSee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. shows that you must file, you may need to file to
get money back. (See Who Should File, later.)If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations
below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you mustGross income. This includes all income youfile.) receive in the form of money, goods, property,In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It alsoand services that is not exempt from tax. It alsoincludes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in includes income from sources outside thechapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest,United States (even if you may exclude all orordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation,part of it). Common types of income are dis-taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income fromcussed in Part Two of this publication.a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income.
Community income. If you are married and
your permanent home is in a community prop-Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind? erty state, half of any income described by state
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. law as community income may be considered
• Your unearned income was more than $800. yours. This affects your federal taxes, including
whether you must file if you do not file a joint• Your earned income was more than $5,000.
return with your spouse. See Publication 555,• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
Community Property, for more information.• $800, or
• Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250. Self-employed individuals. If you are
self-employed, your gross income includes the❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),• Your unearned income was more than $2,050 ($3,300 if 65 or older and blind).
Profit or Loss From Business, line 1 of Schedule• Your earned income was more than $6,250 ($7,500 if 65 or older and blind).
C-EZ, (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business,• Your gross income was more than $1,250 ($2,500 if 65 or older and blind)
and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit orplus the larger of:
Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per-• $800, or
sons, later, for more information about your filing• Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
requirements.
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
If you do not report all of your self-em-
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. ployment income, your social security
• Your unearned income was more than $800. benefits may be lower when you re-CAUTION
!
• Your earned income was more than $5,000. tire.
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and
Filing status.Your filing status depends onitemizes deductions.
whether you are single or married and on your• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
family situation. Your filing status is determined• $800, or
on the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-• Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
ber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for an❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. explanation of each filing status.• Your unearned income was more than $1,800 ($2,800 if 65 or older and blind).
• Your earned income was more than $6,000 ($7,000 if 65 or older and blind).Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return andyear, you generally can have a higher amount of
itemizes deductions. gross income than other taxpayers before you
• Your gross income was more than $1,000 ($2,000 if 65 or older and blind)must file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 65
plus the larger of: on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam-
• $800, or ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2006,
• Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250. you are considered 65 for 2005.
The filing requirements for each category areSurviving Spouses,
explained in this chapter. Executors, Administrators,Do I Have To
and Legal RepresentativesThe filing requirements apply even if you do
File a Return? not owe tax.
You must file a final return for a decedent (a
Even if you do not have to file a return,person who died) if both of the following are true.You must file a federal income tax return if you it may be to your advantage to do so.are a citizen or resident of the United States or a • You are the surviving spouse, executor,See Who Should File, later.
TIP
resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing administrator, or legal representative.
requirements for any of the following categories File only one federal income tax re-• The decedent met the filing requirementsthat apply to you. turn for the year regardless of how at the date of death.many jobs you had, how many FormsCAUTION
!
1. Individuals in general. (There are specialW-2 you received, or how many states you livedFor more information on rules for filing arules for surviving spouses, executors, ad-in during the year. decedent’s final return, see Publication 559,ministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit-
Survivors, Executors, and Administrators.izens and residents living outside the
United States, residents of Puerto Rico,Individuals—In General
and individuals with income from U.S. pos-
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether yousessions.) U.S. Citizens and Residents Living
must file a return depends on three factors:Outside the United States2. Dependents.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outside3. Children under age 14. 1. Your gross income,
the United States, you must file a return if you4. Self-employed persons. 2. Your filing status, and meet the filing requirements. For information on
5. Aliens. 3. Your age. special tax rules that may apply to you, get
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and conditions are met, a parent can elect to include ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.
Resident Aliens Abroad. It is available at most the child’s income on the parent’s return. If this Use the forms discussed in this publication.
U.S. embassies and consulates. Also see How election is made, the child does not have to file a
Nonresident alien.If you are a nonresidentTo Get Tax Help in the back of this publication. return. See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to youInterest and Dividends in chapter 31.
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-
zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 toResidents of Puerto Rico Self-Employed Persons find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and
which forms you should file.Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-You are self-employed if you:dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. income Dual-status taxpayer.If you are a residenttax return if you meet the filing requirements.
• Carry on a trade or business as a solealien for part of the tax year and a nonresidentThis is in addition to any legal requirement you proprietor, alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual-sta-may have to file an income tax return for Puerto• Are an independent contractor, tus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each partRico. of the year. For information on dual-status tax-• Are a member of a partnership, orIf you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the payers, see Publication 519.entire year, gross income does not include in-• Are in business for yourself in any othercome from sources within Puerto Rico, exceptway. Who Should Filefor amounts received as an employee of the
United States or a U.S. agency. If you receiveSelf-employment can include work in additionEven if you do not have to file, you should file aincome from Puerto Rican sources that is notto your regular full-time business activities, suchfederal income tax return to get money back ifsubject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-as certain part-time work you do at home or inany of the following conditions apply.dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-addition to your regular job.come you must have before you are required to You must file a return if your gross income is1. You had federal income tax withheld fromfile a U.S. income tax return is lower than theat least as much as the filing requirement your pay. applicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. Foramount for your filing status and age (shown in2. You qualify for the earned income credit.more information, see Publication 570, TaxTable 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 andSee chapter 36 for more information. Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S.Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-EmploymentPossessions. Tax, if: 3. You qualify for the additional child tax
credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-1. Your net earnings from self-employment tion.Individuals With Income From (excluding church employee income) were
4. You qualify for the health coverage tax$400 or more, orU.S. Possessions
credit. See chapter 37 for more informa-2. You had church employee income of tion.If you had income from Guam, the Common- $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.)wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rulesUse Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your
may apply when determining whether you mustself-employment tax. Self-employment tax is
file a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,comparable to the social security and Medicare
Which Formyou may have to file a return with the individualtax withheld from an employee’s wages. For
island government. See Publication 570 formore information about this tax, get Publication
Should I Use?more information. 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
Employees of foreign governments or in-You must use one of three forms to file yourDependents ternational organizations.If you are a U.S.return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form
citizen who works in the United States for an1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To BeIf you are a dependent (one who meets theinternational organization, a foreign govern-on Paper, later.)dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 toment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of a
find whether you must file a return. You alsoforeign government, and your employer is not
Form 1040EZmust file if your situation is described in Tablerequired to withhold social security and Medi-
1-3. care taxes from your wages, you must includeForm 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.your earnings from services performed in the
Responsibility of parent.Generally, a childUnited States when figuring your net earningsYou can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow-is responsible for filing his or her own tax returnfrom self-employment. ing apply.and for paying any tax on the return. But if a
Ministers.You must include income fromdependent child who must file an income tax 1. Your filing status is single or married filingservices you performed as a minister when fig-return cannot file it for any reason, such as age, jointly. If you were a nonresident alien aturing your net earnings from self-employment,then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon- any time in 2005, your filing status must beunless you have an exemption from self-em-sible person must file it for the child. If the child married filing jointly.ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci-cannot sign the return, the parent or guardian
ence practitioners and members of a religious2. You (and your spouse if married filing amust sign the child’s name followed by the
order who have not taken a vow of poverty. Forjoint return) were under age 65 and notwords “By (your signature), parent for minor
more information, get Publication 517, Socialblind at the end of 2005. If you were bornchild.”
Security and Other Information for Members ofon January 1, 1941, you are considered toChild’s earnings.Amounts a child earns bythe Clergy and Religious Workers. be age 65 at the end of 2005.performing services are his or her gross income.
3. You do not claim any dependents.This is true even if under local law the child’s
Aliensparents have the right to the earnings and may 4. Your taxable income is less thanactually have received them. If the child does not $100,000.Your status as an alien—resident, nonresident,pay the tax due on this income, the parent isor dual-status—determines whether and how 5. Your income is only from wages, salaries,liable for the tax. you must file an income tax return. tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska
The rules used to determine your alien statusPermanent Fund dividends, taxable schol-Children Under Age 14 are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax arship and fellowship grants, and taxable
Guide for Aliens. interest of $1,500 or less.If a child’s only income is interest and dividends
(including capital gain distributions and AlaskaResident alien.If you are a resident alien for 6. You did not receive any advance earned
Permanent Fund dividends) and certain other the entire year, you must file a tax return follow- income credit (EIC) payments.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3.Other Situations When You Must File a 2005 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as:
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in box 12
of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health
Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment Credit, or
Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- 5. Your taxes are from only the following You must meet all of the above requirements
come, such as a deduction for IRA contri- items. to use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use
butions or student loan interest. Form 1040.a. Tax Table. If you meet the above requirements, you can8. You do not claim any credits other than the
b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chapteruse Form 1040A even if you receivedearned income credit.
30.) employer-provided adoption benefits or depen-
9. You do not owe any household employ- dent care benefits.c. Advance earned income credit (EIC)ment taxes on wages you paid to a house-
payments, if you received any. (See If you receive a capital gain distribu-hold employee.
chapter 36.) tion that includes unrecaptured sec-You must meet all of these requirements to tion 1250 gain, section 1202 gain, orCAUTION
!
d. Recapture of an education credit. (Seeuse Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use collectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Formchapter 35.)Form 1040A or Form 1040. 1040A. You must use Form 1040.
e. Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age
Figuring tax.On Form 1040EZ, you can use 14 With Investment Income of More Form 1040only the tax table to figure your tax. You cannotThan $1,600.
use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.
If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A,f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain
you must use Form 1040. You can use FormTax Worksheet.Form 1040A 1040 to report all types of income, deductions,
6. You claim only the following tax credits.and credits.If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, you You may have received Form 1040A or Formmay be able to use Form 1040A. a. The credit for child and dependent care1040EZ in the mail because of the return youexpenses. (See chapter 32.) filed last year. If your situation has changed thisYou can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-
b. The credit for the elderly or the dis-year, it may be to your advantage to file Forming apply.
abled. (See chapter 33.) 1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing
Form 1040 because you can take itemized de-1. Your income is only from wages, salaries,c. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.)ductions, some adjustments to income, andtips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-
d. The additional child tax credit. (Seeties, taxable social security and railroad re- credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form
chapter 34.)tirement benefits, taxable scholarship and 1040EZ.
fellowship grants, interest, ordinary divi-e. The education credits. (See chapterdends (including Alaska Permanent Fund You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-35.)dividends), capital gain distributions, and ing apply.
f. The retirement savings contributionsunemployment compensation.
credit. (See chapter 37.) 1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.2. Your taxable income is less than
g. The earned income credit. (See chapter$100,000. 2. You itemize your deductions.
36.)3. Your adjustments to income are for only 3. You had income that cannot be reported
h. The adoption credit. (See chapter 37.)the following items. on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, including
tax-exempt interest from private activitya. Educator expenses. 7. You did not have an alternative minimum bonds issued after August 7, 1986.
tax adjustment on stock you acquired fromb. IRA deduction. 4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-the exercise of an incentive stock option.
come other than the adjustments listedc. Student loan interest deduction. (See Publication 525, Taxable and Nontax-
earlier under Form 1040A.able Income.)d. Tuition and fees deduction.
5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol-
lected employee tax (social security and4. You do not itemize your deductions.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Medicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) or not have your 2004 income tax return, call the amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu-
group-term life insurance (see chapter 5).IRS at 1-800-829-1040 to get a free transcript ofdent loan, or child support. See Offset against
your account. You will also be asked to enterdebts under Refunds, later.6. You received $20 or more in tips in anyyour date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB isone month and did not report all of them toaccurate and matches the information on recordyour employer. (See chapter 6.) Refund inquiries.If you do not receive yourwith the Social Security Administration by
refund within 3 weeks after your7. You claim any credits other than the cred-checking your annual Social Security State-
its listed earlier under Form 1040A. ment. electronically-filed return was accepted by IRS,
see Past-Due Refund, later.8. You owe the excise tax on insider stock You cannot sign your return electroni-
compensation from an expatriated corpo- cally if you are a first-time filer under
ration. age 16 at the end of 2005, or if you areCAUTION
!
Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay itfiling Form 3115, 3468 (if attachments are re-by April 17, 2006, to avoid late-payment penal-9. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in box quired), 5713, 8283 (if completing Section B),12 with a code Z. ties and interest. You can make your payment8332, 8858, or 8885. electronically by credit card or by scheduling an10. You have to file other forms with your re-For more details on the PIN method, visitelectronic funds withdrawal from your checkingturn to report certain exclusions, taxes, orwww.irs.gov/efile and click on “IRS e-file for Indi-or savings account.transactions. vidual Taxpayers.”
See How To Pay , later, for information onAn Authorized IRS e-file Provider can,how to pay the balance due.with your authorization, generate a
PIN for you.
TIP
Does My Return Have Using an Authorized IRS e-fileForms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is notProvidercomplete without your signature. If you are notTo Be on Paper?
eligible or choose not to sign your return elec-
Many tax professionals electronicallytronically, you must complete, sign, and fileYou may be able to file a paperless return using
file tax returns for their clients. As aForm 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-IRS e-file (electronic filing). It’s so easy, over 68
taxpayer, you have two options.tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL,million taxpayers preferred e-file over filing a
U.S. Individual Income Tax Declaration for anpaper tax return last year.
1) You can prepare your return, take it to anIRS e-file Online Return, whichever applies.This section explains how to e-file: Authorized IRS e-file Provider, and have
the provider transmit it electronically to the• Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider, orState returns.In most states, you can file an
IRS.electronic state return simultaneously with your• Using your personal computer. federal return. For more information, check with2) You can have a tax professional prepare
your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-your return and transmit it for you
fessional, or the IRS website at www.irs.gov/ electronically.IRS e-file efile.
You may personally enter your PIN or com-
plete Form 8879, IRS e-file Signature Authoriza-Refunds. You can have a refund check mailed
tion, to authorize the provider to enter your PINto you, or you can have your refund deposited
directly to your checking or savings account.on your return.
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half theTable 1-4 lists the benefits of IRS e-file. IRS time as when filing on paper. Note. Tax professionals may charge a feee-file uses automation to replace most of the for IRS e-file. Fees may vary depending on theAs with a paper return, you may not get all ofmanual steps needed to process paper returns.your refund if you owe certain past-due professional and the specific services rendered.As a result, the processing of e-file returns is
faster and more accurate than the processing of
Table 1-4.Benefits of IRS e-filepaper returns. However, as with a paper return,
you are responsible for making sure your returnEligible for • Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own taxcontains accurate information and is filed onFree File returns for free using commercially available online tax preparationtime. software.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of
• Review online tax software provider offerings and determine if you arean IRS examination of your return.
eligible by visiting the Free File page at www.irs.gov.
Electronic signatures.Create your own per- Fast! Easy! • Get your refund in half the time as paper filers do, even faster and safer
sonal identification number (PIN) and use a taxConvenient! with direct deposit.
professional or file your own paperless return
• Sign electronically and file a completely paperless return.electronically. If you are married filing jointly, you
and your spouse will each need to create a PIN • Receive an electronic proof of receipt within 48 hours that the IRS received
and enter these PINs as your electronic signa- your return.
tures. • If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal orA PIN is any combination of five numbers, pay by credit card. If you e-file before April 17, 2006, you can schedule anexcept five zeros. If you use a PIN, there is electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings account as late
nothing to sign and nothing to mail—not even as April 17, 2006.
your Forms W-2.
• Prepare and file your federal and state returns together and save time.To verify your identity, you will be asked to
enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) fromAccurate! • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing
Secure! information.your originally filed 2004 income tax return, if
applicable. Do not use your AGI from an • The chance of being audited does not differ whether you e-file or file aamended return (Form 1040X), math error no- paper tax return.tice, or other changed amount from the IRS. AGI
• Your bank account information is safeguarded along with other tax returnis the amount shown on your 2004 Form 1040,
information. The IRS does not have access to credit card numbers.line 36; Form 1040A, line 21; Form 1040EZ, line
4; and on TeleFile Tax Record, line 1. If you do
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
postmarked by a postal employee, the date onUsing Your Personal Computer • April 17, 2006, if you use a calendar year,the receipt is the postmark date. The post- ormarked certified mail receipt is evidence that theYou can file your tax return in a fast, • The 15th day of the 4th month after thereturn was delivered.easy, convenient way using your per- end of your fiscal year if you use a fiscalsonal computer. A computer with a Private delivery services.If you use a pri- year.modem or Internet access and tax preparationvate delivery service designated by the IRS to
software are all you need. Best of all, you cansend your return, the postmark date generally isIf you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in-e-file from the comfort of your home 24 hours athe date the private delivery service records income tax withholding, your return is due by:day, 7 days a week. its database or marks on the mailing label. The
• June 15, 2006, if you use a calendar year,private delivery service can tell you how to getIRS approved tax preparation software is
orwritten proof of this date.available for online use on the Internet, for
The following are designated private deliverydownload from the Internet, and in retail stores. • The 15th day of the 6th month after theservices.For information, visit our website at end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal
www.irs.gov/efile. year.• DHL Express (DHL): DHL Same Day
Service, DHL Next Day 10:30 am, DHL Get Publication 519 for more filing information.Next Day 12:00 pm, DHL Next Day 3:00
Through Employers and Financial pm, and DHL 2nd Day Service. Filing for a decedent.If you must file a finalInstitutions income tax return for a taxpayer who died during• Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priority
the year (a decedent), the return is due by theOvernight, FedEx Standard Overnight,Some businesses offer free e-file to their em-
15th day of the 4th month after the end of theFedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority,ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it
decedent’s normal tax year. In most cases, for aand FedEx International First.for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-
2005 return, this will be April 17, 2006. Seetion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee, • United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS NextPublication 559.member, or customer benefit. Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS
2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS
Extensions of Time To FileWorldwide Express Plus, and UPS World-
Free Help With Your Return wide Express.
You may be able to get an extension of time toFree help in preparing your return is available file your return. Special rules apply for those whonationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. The Private delivery services cannot de-were:Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro- liver items to P.O. boxes. You must
• Outside the United States, orgram is designed to help low-income taxpayers use the U.S. Postal Service to mailCAUTION
!
and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)any item to an IRS P.O. box address. • Serving in a combat zone.
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60
Electronically filed returns.If you use IRSor older with their tax returns. Many VITA sites
e-file, your return is considered filed on time ifAutomatic Extensionoffer free electronic filing and all volunteers will
the authorized electronic return transmitter post-let you know about the credits and deductions
marks the transmission by the due date. AnIf you cannot file your 2005 return by the dueyou may be entitled to claim. To find a site near
authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-date, you may be able to get an automaticyou, call 1-800-829-1040. Or to find the nearest
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits6-month extension of time to file.AARP TaxAide site, visit AARP’s website at
electronic tax return information directly to thewww.aarp.org/taxaide or call 1-888-227-7669.
IRS. Example. If your return is due on April 17,For more information on these programs, go to
The electronic postmark is a record of when2006, you will have until October 16, 2006, towww.irs.gov and enter keyword “VITA” in the
the authorized electronic return transmitter re-file.upper right-hand corner.
ceived the transmission of your electronically If you do not pay the tax due by thefiled return on its host system. The date and timeregular due date (generally, April 15),in your time zone controls whether your elec- you will owe interest. You may also beCAUTION
!
tronically filed return is timely. charged penalties, discussed later.When Do I
Filing late.If you do not file your return by theHow to get the automatic extension.Youdue date, you may have to pay a failure-to-fileHave To File? can get the automatic extension by:penalty and interest. For more information, see
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under AmountApril 17, 2006, is the due date for filing your 1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
You Owe .2005 income tax return if you use the calendar 2. Filing a paper form.If you were due a refund but you did not file ayear. For a quick view of due dates for filing a
return, you generally must file within 3 yearsreturn with or without an extension of time to file
E-file options. There are two ways you canfrom the date the return was due (including ex-(discussed later), see Table 1-5.
use e-file to get an extension of time to file.tensions) to get that refund.If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the Complete Form 4868, Application for Automaticlast day of any month except December, or aNonresident alien. If you are a nonresident Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In-52-53-week year), your income tax return is duealien and earn wages subject to U.S. income tax come Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If youby the 15th day of the 4th month after the closewithholding, your 2005 U.S. income tax return think you may owe tax when you file your return,of your fiscal year. (Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by: use Part II of the form to estimate your balanceWhen the due date for doing any act for tax
purposes—filing a return, paying taxes, etc.—Table 1-5. When To File Your 2005 Returnfalls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the
due date is delayed until the next business day. For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.
Filing on time.Your paper return is filed on For Certain Taxpayers
For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly
addressed, has enough postage, and is post-No extension requested April 17, 2006 June 15, 2006marked by the due date. If you send your return
by registered mail, the date of the registration isAutomatic extension October 16, 2006 October 16, 2006
Form 4868 filed, or creditthe postmark date. The registration is evidence
card payment madethat the return was delivered. If you send a
return by certified mail and have your receipt
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not extension. If you and your spouse file separate 2. The last day of any continuous qualified
also send a paper Form 4868. returns, this automatic extension applies only to hospitalization for injury from service in the
the spouse who qualifies. combat zone.E-file using your personal computer or a
tax professional. You can use a tax software In addition to the 180 days, your deadline isHow to get the extension.To use this auto-package with your personal computer or a tax also extended by the number of days you hadmatic extension, you must attach a statement toprofessional to file Form 4868 electronically. left to take action with the IRS when you enteredyour return explaining what situation qualifiedYou will need to provide certain information from the combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2
you for the extension. (See the situations listedyour tax return for 2004. If you wish to make a months (January 1–April 15) to file your taxunder (2), earlier.)payment by electronic funds withdrawal, see return. Any days left in this period when you
Electronic payment options, under How To Pay, entered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannotlater in this chapter. months if you entered it before the beginning of
file your return within the automatic 2-monththe year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-E-file and pay by credit card.You can get extension period, you may be able to get ansion of Deadline in Publication 3 for more infor-an extension by paying part or all of your esti-additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6mation.mate of tax due by using a credit card. You canmonths. File Form 4868 and check the box onThe above rules on the extension for filingdo this by phone or over the Internet. You do notline 8. your return also apply when you are deployedfile Form 4868. See Credit card, under How To This additional 4-month extension of time tooutside the United States (away from your per-Pay, later in this chapter. file is not a further extension of time to pay. Youmanent duty station) while participating in a des-can use a credit card to pay your estimate of taxFiling a paper Form 4868.You can get an ignated contingency operation.due. See How To Pay, later in this chapter.extension of time to file by filing a paper Form
4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form
No further extension.An extension of moreinstructions.
than 6 months will generally not be granted.If you want to make a payment with the form, How Do I PrepareHowever, if you are outside the United Statesmake your check or money order payable to the
and meet certain tests, you may be granted a“United States Treasury.” Write your SSN, day- My Return?longer extension. For more information, see Fur-time phone number, and “2005 Form 4868” on
ther extensions under When To File and Pay inyour check or money order. This section explains how to get ready to fill inPublication 54.
When to file.You must request the automatic your tax return and when to report your income
extension by the due date for your return. You and expenses. It also explains how to complete
can file your return any time before the 6-month certain sections of the form. You may find TableIndividuals Serving inextension period ends. 1-6 helpful when you prepare your return.Combat Zone
In most cases, based on what you filed lastWhen you file your return.Enter any pay-
year, the IRS will mail you Form 1040, FormThe deadline for filing your tax return, payingment you made related to the extension of time
1040A, or Form 1040EZ with related instruc-any tax you may owe, and filing a claim forto file on Form 1040, line 69. If you file Form
tions. Before you fill in the form, look at the formrefund is automatically extended if you serve in a1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in
instructions to see if you need, or would benefitcombat zone. This applies to members of theyour total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 9, or
from filing, a different form this year. Also see ifArmed Forces, as well as merchant marinesForm 1040A, line 43. Also enter “Form 4868”
you need any additional forms or schedules.serving aboard vessels under the operationaland the amount paid in the space to the left of
You may also want to read Does My Returncontrol of the Department of Defense, Redline 9 or line 43.
Have To Be on Paper, earlier.Cross personnel, accredited correspondents,
and civilians under the direction of the ArmedIf you do not receive a tax return package in
Forces in support of the Armed Forces. the mail, or if you need other forms, you canIndividuals Outside the order them or print them from the Internet. See
United States How To Get Tax Help in the back of this publica-Combat zone. For purposes of the automatic
tion.extension, the term “combat zone” includes theYou are allowed an automatic 2-month exten-following areas.sion (until June 15, 2006, if you use the calendar
Table 1-6.Six Steps for Preparingyear) to file your 2005 return and pay any federal1. The Persian Gulf area, effective January
income tax due if: Your Return17, 1991.
2. The qualified hazardous duty area of Bos-1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and
nia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Mace-1 — Get your records together for income2. On the due date of your return: donia, effective November 21, 1995. and expenses.
a. You are living outside the United States3. The qualified hazardous duty area of the2 — Get the forms, schedules, and
and Puerto Rico, and your main place publications you need.Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/
of business or post of duty is outsideMontenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,3 — Fill in your return.the United States and and the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-
Puerto Rico, or 4 — Check your return to make sure it islel, effective March 24, 1999.
correct.b. You are in military or naval service on4. Afghanistan, effective September 19,
duty outside the United States and 5 — Sign and date your return.2001.
Puerto Rico. 6 — Attach all required forms andSee Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Tax
schedules.Guide, for information about other tax benefitsHowever, if you pay the tax due after the
available to military personnel serving in a com-regular due date (generally, April 15), interest
bat zone.will be charged from that date until the date the Substitute tax forms.You cannot use yourtax is paid. own version of a tax form unless it meets theExtension period.The deadline for filing yourIf you served in a combat zone or qualified requirements explained in Publication 1167,return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim forhazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a General Rules and Specifications for Substituterefund is extended for at least 180 days after thelonger extension of time to file. See Individuals Forms and Schedules.later of:Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rules
that apply to you. 1. The last day you are in a combat zone orForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should
Married taxpayers.If you file a joint return, the last day the area qualifies as a combat receive Form W-2 from your employer. You will
only one spouse has to qualify for this automatic zone, or need the information from this form to prepare
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your return. See Form W-2  under Credit for actually pay them. This is the method most indi- Therefore, Alice did not constructively receive
Withholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4. the amount by which her salary was reduced tovidual taxpayers use.
If you do not receive Form W-2 by January pay the substitute teacher.Constructive receipt.Generally, you con-31, 2006, contact your employer. If you still dostructively receive income when it is credited toAccrual method. If you use an accrualnot get the form by February 15, the IRS canyour account or set apart in any way that makesmethod, you generally report income when youhelp you by requesting the form from your em-it available to you. You do not need to haveearn it, rather than when you receive it. Youployer. When you request IRS help, be preparedphysical possession of it. For example, interestgenerally deduct your expenses when you incurto provide the following information. credited to your bank account on December 31,them, rather than when you pay them.
• Your name, address (including zip code),2005, is taxable income to you in 2005 if youIncome paid in advance.An advance pay-and phone number. could have withdrawn it in 2005 (even if thement of income is generally included in grossamount is not entered in your passbook or with-• Your SSN. income in the year you receive it. Your methoddrawn until 2006). of accounting does not matter as long as the• Your dates of employment.
Garnisheed wages. If your employer usesincome is available to you. An advance payment
• Your employer’s name, address (includingyour wages to pay your debts, or if your wagesmay include rent or interest you receive in ad-
zip code), and phone number. are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is vance and pay for services you will perform
later.constructively received by you. You must in-
A limited deferral until the next tax year mayclude these wages in income for the year youForm 1099. If you received certain types of
be allowed for certain advance payments. Seewould have received them.income, you may receive a Form 1099. For
Publication 538 for specific information.example, if you received taxable interest of $10Brokerage and other accounts. Profits
or more, the payer generally must give you afrom a brokerage account, or similar account,Additional information.For more informationForm 1099-INT. If you have not received it byare fully taxable in the year you earn them. Thison accounting methods, including how toJanuary 31, 2006, contact the payer. If you stillis true even if: change your accounting method, get Publicationdo not get the form by February 15, call the IRS 538.for help. 1. You do not withdraw the earnings,
2. The credit balance in the account may beSocial Security NumberWhen Do I Report My reduced or eliminated by losses in later
years, or You must enter your social security numberIncome and Expenses?
(SSN) in the space provided on your return. Be3. Current profits are used to reduce or elimi-You must figure your taxable income on the sure the SSN on your return is the same as thenate a debit balance from previous years.basis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual SSN on your social security card. If you are
accounting period used for keeping records and married, enter the SSNs for both you and yourDebts paid for you. If another personreporting income and expenses. You must ac- spouse, whether you file jointly or separately.cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift orcount for your income and expenses in a way If you are filing a joint return, write the SSNsloan), you have constructively received thethat clearly shows your taxable income. The way in the same order as the names. Use this sameamount and generally must include it in youryou do this is called an accounting method. This order in submitting other forms and documentsgross income for the year. See Canceled Debtssection explains which accounting periods and to the IRS.in chapter 12 for more information.methods you can use.
Name change. If you changed your name be-Payment to third party.If a third party is
cause of marriage, divorce, etc., immediatelypaid income from property you own, you have
notify your Social Security Administration (SSA)constructively received the income. It is theAccounting Periods
office so the name on your tax return is the samesame as if you had actually received the income
as the one the SSA has on its records. This willMost individual tax returns cover a calendarand paid it to the third party.
help prevent delays in issuing your refund andyear—the 12 months from January 1 through
Payment to an agent.Income an agent re-safeguard your future social security benefits.December 31. If you do not use a calendar year,
ceives for you is income you constructively re-your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regular
Dependent’s social security number.Youceived in the year the agent receives it. If youfiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the
must provide the SSN of each dependent youindicate in a contract that your income is to belast day of any month except December. A
claim, regardless of the dependent’s age. Thispaid to another person, you must include the52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53
requirement applies to all dependents (not justamount in your gross income when the otherweeks and always ends on the same day of the
your children) claimed on your tax return.person receives it.week.
You choose your accounting period (tax Exception. If your child was born and diedCheck received or available.A valid check
year) when you file your first income tax return. It in 2005 and you do not have an SSN for thethat was made available to you before the end of
cannot be longer than 12 months. child, you may attach a copy of the child’s birththe tax year is constructively received by you in
certificate instead. If you do, enter “DIED” inthat year. A check that was “made available toMore information. For more information on column (2) of line 6c (Form 1040 or 1040A).you” includes a check you have already re-accounting periods, including how to change
ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-your accounting period, see Publication 538, No social security number.File Form SS-5,cludes, for example, your last paycheck of theAccounting Periods and Methods. Application for a Social Security Card, with youryear that your employer made available for youlocal SSA office to get an SSN for yourself orto pick up at the office before the end of the year.your dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeksIt is constructively received by you in that yearAccounting Methods to get an SSN. If you or your dependent is notwhether or not you pick it up before the end ofeligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayerthe year or wait to receive it by mail after the endYour accounting method is the way you account identification number (ITIN), later.for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers of the year. If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, youuse either the cash method or an accrual No constructive receipt.There may be must show proof of age, identity, and citizenshipmethod. You choose a method when you filefacts to show that you did not constructivelyor alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12your first income tax return. If you want toreceive income. or older and have never been assigned an SSN,change your accounting method after that, you you must appear in person with this proof at angenerally must get IRS approval. Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreedSSA office.
to her school board’s condition that, in her ab-Cash method. If you use this method, report Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on
sence, she would receive only the differenceall items of income in the year in which you the Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by
between her regular salary and the salary of aactually or constructively receive them. Gener- calling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques-
ally, you deduct all expenses in the year you substitute teacher hired by the school board. tions about which documents you can use as
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your SSN of your spouse or dependent as required,Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from your
SSA office. you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus- employer of wages and other compensation
If your dependent does not have an SSN by sion on Penalties, later, for more information.paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay.
the time your return is due, you may want to ask You should have a Form W-2 from each em-SSN on correspondence. If you write to thefor an extension of time to file, as explained ployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 inIRS about your tax account, be sure to includeearlier under When Do I Have To File. the place indicated on the front page of youryour SSN (and the name and SSN of yourIf you do not provide a required SSN or if you return. Attach it only to the front page of yourspouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- return, not to any attachments. For more infor-spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-creased and any refund may be reduced. mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4.tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to
Adoption taxpayer identification number If you received a Form 1099-R, Distributionsyour correspondence promptly.
(ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-Presidential Electionget an SSN for the child until the adoption is tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-
final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead ofCampaign Fund held, attach a copy of that form in the place
an SSN. indicated on the front page of your return.
File Form W-7A, Application for TaxpayerThis fund helps pay for Presidential election
Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop-campaigns. The fund reduces candidates’ de-Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of thependence on large contributions from individu-ules to file with Form 1040EZ.following are true. als and groups and places candidates on an
equal financial footing in the general election. If• You have a child living with you who was Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedulesyou want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. Ifplaced in your home for legal adoption. and forms that you had to complete behind theyou are filing a joint return, your spouse can alsoForm 1040A in order by number. If you are filing• You cannot get the child’s existing SSNhave $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, yourSchedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach itemseven though you have made a reasonabletax or refund will not change. unless required to do so.attempt to get it from the birth parents, the
placement agency, and other persons. Computations Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules• You cannot get an SSN for the child from behind Form 1040 in order of the “AttachmentThe following information on entering numbersthe SSA because, for example, the adop- Sequence Number” shown in the upper righton your tax return may be useful in making thetion is not final. corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange allreturn easier to complete.• You cannot get an individual taxpayer other statements or attachments in the same
identification number (ITIN) (discussed order as the forms and schedules they relate toRounding off dollars.You may round off
later) for the child. and attach them last. Do not attach items unlesscents to whole dollars on your return and sched-
required to do so.ules. If you do round to whole dollars, you must• You are eligible to claim the child as a
round all amounts. To round, drop amountsdependent on your tax return.
under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 toThird Party DesigneeAfter the adoption is final, you must apply for an99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39
SSN for the child. You cannot continue using thebecomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3. You can authorize the IRS to discuss your returnATIN. If you have to add two or more amounts towith a friend, family member, or any other per-figure the amount to enter on a line, includeSee Form W-7A for more information. son you choose. If you check the “Yes” box incents when adding the amounts and round offthe Third party designee area of your 2005 taxNonresident alien spouse.If your spouse isonly the total. return and provide the information required, youa nonresident alien and you file a joint or sepa-
are authorizing:rate return, your spouse must have either anExample. You receive two Forms W-2: one
SSN or an ITIN. If your spouse is not eligible forshowing wages of $5,000.55 and one showing1. The IRS to call the designee to answer anyan SSN, see the next discussion. wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youquestions that arise during the processingwould enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =Individual taxpayer identification number of your return, and$23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).(ITIN).The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are 2. The designee to:a nonresident or resident alien and you do notEqual amounts. If you are asked to enter thehave and are not eligible to get an SSN. To a. Give information that is missing fromsmaller or larger of two equal amounts, enterapply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. Itthat amount. your return to the IRS,usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.
b. Call the IRS for information about theEnter this number on your tax return whereverExample. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500. processing of your return or the statusyour SSN is requested. Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.of your refund or payments,Enter $500 on line 5.If you are applying for an ITIN in order
to file your tax return, attach your c. Receive copies of notices or transcripts
Negative amounts. If you need to enter acompleted tax return to your Form related to your return, upon request,
TIP
negative amount, put the amount in parenthesesW-7. See the Form W-7 instructions for how and andrather than using a minus sign. To combinewhere to file. d. Respond to certain IRS notices aboutpositive and negative amounts, add all the posi-
Alien dependent. If your dependent is a math errors, offsets (see Refunds,tive amounts together and then subtract the
nonresident or resident alien who does not have later), and return preparation.negative amounts.
and is not eligible to get an SSN, file Form W-7
with the IRS to apply for an ITIN. Enter this The authorization will automatically end noAttachmentsnumber on your return wherever the later than the due date (without any extensions)
dependent’s SSN is requested. for filing your 2006 tax return. This is April 16,Depending on the form you file and the items
2007, for most people.An ITIN is for tax use only. It does notreported on your return, you may have to com-
See your form instructions for more informa-entitle you or your dependent to socialplete additional schedules and forms and attach
security benefits or change the em- tion.them to your return.CAUTION
!
ployment or immigration status of either of you If you want to allow the paid preparerYou may be able to file a paperlessunder U.S. law. who signed your return to discuss itreturn using IRS e-file. There’s noth-
with the IRS, just enter “Preparer” inPenalty for not providing social security ing to sign, attach, or mail, not even
TIPTIP
the space for the designee’s name.number. If you do not include your SSN or theyour Forms W-2.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A paid preparer can sign the return manually explaining the difference. Cashing the checkSignatures or use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, or does not stop you from claiming an additional
computer software program. The preparer is amount of refund.You must sign and date your return. If you file apersonally responsible for affixing his or her sig-If you did not receive a notice and you havejoint return, both you and your spouse must signnature to the return. any questions about the amount of your refund,the return, even if only one of you had income.If the preparer is self-employed (that is, notyou should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not
If you file a joint return, both spousesemployed by any person or business to preparereceived a notice, call the IRS.
are generally liable for the tax, and thethe return), he or she should check the self-em-
entire tax liability may be assessed Offset against debts.If you are due a refundployed box in the Paid Preparer’s Use OnlyCAUTION
!
against either spouse. See chapter 2. but have not paid certain amounts you owe, allspace on the return.
or part of your refund may be used to pay all orThe preparer must give you a copy of yourIf you e-file your return, you can use part of the past-due amount. This includesreturn in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.an electronic signature to sign your past-due federal income tax, other federal debtsIf you prepare your own return, leave thisreturn. See Does My Return Have To
TIP
(such as student loans), state income tax, andarea blank. If another person prepares your re-Be on Paper, earlier. child and spousal support payments. You will beturn and does not charge you, that personIf you are due a refund, it cannot be issued notified if the refund you claimed has been offsetshould not sign your return.unless you have signed your return. against your debts.If you have questions about whether aEnter your occupation in the space providedpreparer must sign your return, contact any IRSJoint return and injured spouse.When ain the signature section. If you file a joint return,office. joint return is filed and only one spouse owes aenter both your occupation and your spouse’s
past-due amount, the other spouse can be con-occupation. Entering your daytime phone num-
Refunds sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouseber may help speed the processing of your re-
can get a refund for his or her share of theturn.
When you complete your return, you will deter-overpayment that would otherwise be used to
mine if you paid more income tax than youWhen someone can sign for you. You can pay the past-due amount.
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amountappoint an agent to sign your return if you are: To be considered an injured spouse, you
you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Formmust:
1. Unable to sign the return because of dis-1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of the
ease or injury, overpayment to your next year’s (2006) esti- 1. File a joint return, and
mated tax. You cannot have your overpayment2. Absent from the United States for a contin- 2. Have reported income (such as wages, in-applied to your 2006 estimated tax if you fileuous period of at least 60 days before the terest, etc.), orForm 1040EZ.due date for filing your return, or 3. Have made and reported tax paymentsIf you choose to have a 2005 overpay-3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of- (such as federal income tax withheld fromment applied to your 2006 estimatedfice in your area. wages or estimated tax payments), ortax, you cannot change your mind andCAUTION
!
claimed the earned income credit or otherhave any of it refunded to you after the due datePower of attorney.A return signed by an refundable credit, and(without extensions) of your 2005 return.agent in any of these cases must have a power 4. Not be required to pay the past-dueFollow the form instructions to complete theof attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the amount.entries to claim your refund and/or to apply youragent to sign for you. You can use a POA thatoverpayment to your 2006 estimated tax.states that the agent is granted authority to sign
the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of Note. If the injured spouse’s permanentIf your refund for 2005 is large, you
Attorney and Declaration of Representative. home is in a community property state, then themay want to decrease the amount of
Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is injured spouse must only meet (1) and (4)income tax withheld from your pay in
TIP
granted authority to sign the return. above. For more information, see Publication2006. See chapter 4 for more information.
555, Community Property.Unable to sign.If the taxpayer is mentally Instead of getting a pa- If you are an injured spouse, you must fileSimple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
incompetent and cannot sign the return, it must per check, you may be Form 8379, Injured Spouse Allocation, to havebe signed by a court-appointed representativeable to have your refund deposited directly intoyour portion of the overpayment refunded towho can act for the taxpayer. your account at a bank or other financial institu-you. Follow the instructions for the form.tion. Follow the form instructions to request di-If the taxpayer is mentally competent but If you have not filed your joint return and yourect deposit.physically unable to sign the return or POA, a know that your joint refund will be offset, fileIf the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRSvalid “signature” is defined under state law. It Form 8379 with your return. You should receivewill send a check instead.can be anything that clearly indicates the your refund within 14 weeks from the date thetaxpayer’s intent to sign. For example, the paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from theOverpayment less than one dollar.If yourtaxpayer’s “X” with the signatures of two wit- date the return is filed electronically.overpayment is less than one dollar, you will notnesses might be considered a valid signature If you filed your joint return and your jointget a refund unless you ask for it in writing.under a state’s law. refund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When
Cashing your refund check.Cash your tax filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks toSpouse unable to sign.If your spouse is una-refund check soon after you receive it. Checksreceive your refund. Do not attach the previouslyble to sign for any reason, see Signing a jointnot cashed within 12 months of the date they arefiled tax return, but do include copies of allreturn in chapter 2. issued will be canceled and the proceeds re-Forms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any
turned to the IRS. Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld.Child’s return.If a child has to file a tax returnIf your check has been canceled, you can Generally, you must file Form 8379 no laterbut cannot sign the return, the child’s parent,apply to the IRS to have it reissued. than 2 years after the date of the Notice ofguardian, or another legally responsible person
Offset. A separate Form 8379 must be filed formust sign the child’s name, followed by theRefund more or less than expected.If you each tax year to be considered.words “By (your signature), parent for minorreceive a check for a refund you are not entitledchild.” to, or for an overpayment that should have been An injured spouse claim is different
credited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.from an innocent spouse relief re-
Call the IRS. quest. An injured spouse uses FormPaid Preparer CAUTION
!
If you receive a check for more than the8379 to request the division of the tax overpay-
Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in refund you claimed, do not cash the check untilment attributed to each spouse. An innocent
preparing, or review your tax return must sign it you receive a notice explaining the difference.spouse uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent
and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer’s If your refund check is for less than youSpouse Relief, to request relief from joint liability
area of your return. claimed, it should be accompanied by a notice for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for items of the other spouse (or former spouse)Electronic payment options.Electronic pay- use. You can make payments online or by
ment options are convenient, safe, and secure phone.that were incorrectly reported on the joint return.
methods for paying individual income taxes. Here are just a few of the benefits of thisFor information on innocent spouses, see Relief
There’s no check to write, money order to buy, easy-to-use system.from joint liability under Filing a Joint Return in
or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24chapter 2. • Convenient and flexible. You can use it tohours a day, 7 days a week. schedule payments in advance. For exam-
Credit card.You can use your American ple, you can schedule estimated tax pay-Amount You Owe
Express , Discover , MasterCard , or Visa ments (Form 1040-ES) or installment
When you complete your return, you will deter-credit card. agreement payments weekly, monthly, or
mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that quarterly.To pay by credit card, call a service provider
you owe. If you owe additional tax, you shouldand follow the recorded instructions. You can• Fast and accurate. You can make a taxpay it with your return. also pay by credit card over the Internet using apayment in minutes. Because there areservice provider’s website.If the IRS figures your tax for you, you will verification steps along the way, you canThe service providers charge a conveniencereceive a bill for any tax that is due. You should check and review your information beforefee based on the amount you are paying. Feespay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of sending it.may vary between the providers. You will be toldyour return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in
• Safe and secure. It offers the highestwhat the fee is during the transaction and willchapter 30.
available levels of security. Every transac-have the option to continue or end the transac-If you do not pay your tax when due, tion receives an immediate confirmation.tion. You may also obtain the convenience feeyou may have to pay a failure-to-payby calling the service provider’s automated cus-penalty. See Penalties, later. ForCAUTION
!
For more information or details on enrolling,tomer service telephone number or visiting theirmore information about your balance due, see visit www.EFTPS.gov  or call EFTPS Customerrespective website.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Process. Service at 1-800-316-6541 (individual) orDo not add the convenience fee to1-800-555-4477 (business).If the amount you owe for 2005 is your tax payment.large, you may want to increase the Estimated tax payments.Do not include anyCAUTION
!
amount of income tax withheld from
TIP
2006 estimated tax payment in the payment forIf you pay by credit card, write the confirma-your pay or make estimated tax payments for your 2005 income tax return. See chapter 4 fortion number you were given at the end of the2006. See chapter 4 for more information. information on how to pay estimated tax.transaction and the tax payment amount in the
upper left corner of page 1 of your tax return.
How To Pay InterestService Providers
If you have an amount due on your tax return, Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by theLink2Gov Corporationyou can pay by check, money order, or credit due date of your return. Interest is charged evencard. If you filed electronically, you also may be if you get an extension of time for filing.To make aable to make your payment electronically.payment, call.... 1-888-PAY-1040SM
If the IRS figures your tax for you,o r ........... 1-888-729-1040You do not have to pay if the amount interest cannot start earlier than theyou owe is less than $1. For Customer 31st day after the IRS sends you a bill.
TIP
Service........ 1-888-658-5465
TIP
For information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chap-
ter 30.Web Address .... www.PAY1040.com
Check or money order.If you pay by check or
Interest on penalties.Interest is charged onmoney order, make it out to the “United States
Official Payments Corporation the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-relatedTreasury.” Show your correct name, address,
penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due dateSSN, daytime phone number, and the tax yearTo make a of the return (including extensions) to the date ofand form number on the front of your check orpayment, call.... 1-800-2PAY-TAXSM
payment. Interest on other penalties starts ono r ........... 1-800-272-9829money order. If you are filing a joint return, enter
the date of notice and demand, but is notthe SSN shown first on your tax return. For Customer charged on penalties paid within 21 calendarService........ 1-877-754-4413For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2005 days from the date of the notice (or within 10and you owe additional tax, show your name,Web Address .... www.officialpayments.com business days if the notice is for $100,000 oraddress, SSN, daytime phone number, and more).You can e-file and pay in a single step by“2005 Form 1040” on the front of your check or
authorizing a credit card payment. This option ismoney order. If you file an amended return Interest due to IRS error or delay.All or partavailable through some tax software packages(Form 1040X) for 2004 and you owe tax, show of any interest you were charged can be forgivenand tax professionals. You can also pay byyour name, address, SSN, daytime phone num- if the interest is due to an unreasonable error orcredit card using the telephone or the Internet.ber, and “2004 Form 1040X” on the front of your delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in
check or money order. performing a ministerial or managerial act.Electronic funds withdrawal. You can
A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-e-file and pay in a single step by authorizing anEnclose your payment with your return, but
cal act that occurs during the processing of yourelectronic funds withdrawal from your checkingdo not attach it to the form. If you filed Form
case. A managerial act includes personnelor savings account. If you select this payment1040, please complete Form 1040-V, Payment
transfers and extended personnel training. Aoption, you will need to have your account num-Voucher, and enclose it with your payment and
decision concerning the proper application ofber, your financial institution’s routing transitreturn. Form 1040-V will help us process your
federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerialnumber, and account type (checking or sav-payment more accurately and efficiently. Follow
act.ings). You can schedule the payment for anythe instructions that come with the form.
The interest can be forgiven only if you arefuture date up to and including the return dueDo not mail cash with your return. If you pay not responsible in any important way for thedate (April 17, 2006).cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part of error or delay and the IRS has notified you inyour records. Be sure to check with your financialwriting of the deficiency or payment. For moreinstitution to make sure that an elec-Payment not honored. If your check or information, get Publication 556, Examination oftronic funds withdrawal is allowed andCAUTION
!
money order is not honored by your bank (or Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund.to get the correct routing and account numbers.other financial institution) and the IRS does not Interest and certain penalties may also be
receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi-Electronic Federal Tax Payment System suspended for a limited period if you filed your
tion, you may be subject to a dishonored check(EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment system return by the due date (including extensions)
penalty. that all individual and business taxpayers can and the IRS does not provide you with a notice
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
specifically stating your liability and the basis for Bureau of the Public Debt
it before the close of the 18-month period begin- Department G Where Do I File?ning on the later of: P.O. Box 2188
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188. After you complete your return, you must send it• The date the return is filed, or
to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to• The due date of the return without regard file it electronically. See Does My Return HaveOr, enclose your separate check in the envel-to extensions. To Be on Paper, earlier.ope with your income tax return. Do not add
For more information, get Publication 556.this gift to any tax you owe. Mailing your return.If an addressed envel-You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-ope came with your tax forms package, youInstallment Agreement tribution on next year’s tax return if you itemizeshould mail your return in that envelope.your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you do not have an addressed envelope orIf you cannot pay the full amount due with your
if you moved during the year, mail your return toreturn, you can ask to make monthly installment
Peel-Off Address Label the address shown at the end of this publicationpayments for the full or a partial amount. How-
for the area where you now live.ever, you will be charged interest and may be
After you have completed your return, peel offcharged a late payment penalty on the tax not
the label with your name and address from thepaid by April 17, 2006, even if your request to
back of your tax return package and place it inpay in installments is granted. If your request is
the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Formgranted, you must also pay a fee. To limit the What Happens After1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. Ifinterest and penalty charges, pay as much of the
you have someone prepare your return, givetax as possible with your return. But before re- I File?that person your label to use on your tax return.questing an installment agreement, you should
If you file electronically and you are not eligi-consider other less costly alternatives, such as a After you send your return to the IRS, you mayble or choose not to sign your return using yourbank loan. have some questions. This section discussesPIN, use your label on Form 8453 or 8453-OL.To ask for an installment agreement, use concerns you may have about recordkeeping,(More information on electronic filing is foundForm 9465, Installment Agreement Request. your refund, and what to do if you move.earlier in this chapter.)You should receive a response to your request
The label helps the IRS to correctly identifywithin 30 days. But if you file your return after
What Records Shouldyour account. It also saves processing costs andMarch 31, it may take longer for a reply.
speeds up processing so that refunds can beIn addition to paying by check or money I Keep?
issued sooner.order, you can use a credit card or EFTPS to
make installment agreement payments. See You must write your SSN in the You must keep records so that youCredit card and Electronic Federal Tax Payment spaces provided on your tax return. can prepare a complete and accurateSystem (EFTPS), under How To Pay, earlier. income tax return. The law does notCAUTION
!
RECORDS
require any special form of records. However,Guaranteed availability of installment agree-
you should keep all receipts, canceled checks orCorrecting the label.Make necessary namement. The IRS must agree to accept the full
other proof of payment, and any other records toand address changes on the label. If you havepayment of your tax liability in installments if, as
support any deductions or credits you claim.an apartment number that is not shown on theof the date you offer to enter into the agreement:
If you file a claim for refund, you must be ablelabel, please write it in. If you changed your
1. Your total taxes (not counting interest, to prove by your records that you have overpaidname, see the discussion under Social Security
penalties, additions to the tax, or additional your tax.Number, earlier.
amounts) do not exceed $10,000,
How long to keep records. You must keepNo label. If you did not receive a tax return2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse if your records for as long as they are important forpackage with a label, print or type your namethe liability relates to a joint return) have the federal tax law.and address in the spaces provided at the top ofnot: Keep records that support an item of incomeForm 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are married
or a deduction appearing on a return until thea. Failed to file any required income taxfiling a separate return, do not enter your
period of limitations for the return runs out. (Areturn, spouse’s name in the space at the top. Instead,
period of limitations is the period of time afterenter his or her name in the space provided onb. Failed to pay any tax shown on any which no legal action can be brought.) For as-line 3.such return, or sessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3If you file Form 1040EZ and you do not haveyears from the date you filed the return. For filingc. Entered into an installment agreementa label, print or type this information in thea claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3for the payment of any income tax, spaces provided. years from the date you filed the original return,
or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-3. You show you cannot pay your income taxP.O. box. If your post office does not deliverever is later. Returns filed before the due datein full when due, mail to your street address and you have a P.O.are treated as filed on the due date.box, print your P.O. box number on the line for4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years or If you did not report income that you shouldyour present home address instead of yourless, and have reported on your return, and it is more thanstreet address. 25% of the income shown on the return, the5. You agree to comply with the tax laws
period of limitations does not run out until 6while your agreement is in effect. Foreign address. If your address is outsideyears after you filed the return. If a return is false
the United States or its possessions or territo-or fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no
ries, enter the information on the line for “City,return is filed, an action can generally be broughtGift To Reduce Debt town or post office, state, and ZIP code” in theat any time.Held by the Public following order: You may need to keep records relating to the
basis of property longer than the period of limita-1. City, tions. Keep those records as long as they areYou can make a contribution (gift) to
important in figuring the basis of the original orreduce debt held by the public. If you2. Province or state, and
replacement property. Generally, this means forwish to do so, make a separate check3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi-as long as you own the property and, after youpayable to “Bureau of the Public Debt.” ate the name of the country.) dispose of it, for the period of limitations thatSend your check to:
applies to you. See chapter 13 for information onFollow the country’s practice for entering the
basis.postal code.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy check, no more interest will be paid on the over-
1. You did not report some income,C until you begin receiving social security bene- payment included in the check.
fits. This will help protect your benefits in case 2. You claimed deductions or credits youInterest on erroneous refund.All or part ofthere is a question about your work record or should not have claimed,any interest you were charged on an erroneousearnings in a particular year. Review the infor-refund generally will be forgiven. Any interest3. You did not claim deductions or credits youmation shown on your annual (for workers overcharged for the period before demand for repay-could have claimed, orage 25) Social Security Statement. ment was made will be forgiven unless:
4. You should have claimed a different filing
Copies of returns.You should keep copies of status. (Once you file a joint return, you1. You, or a person related to you, causedtax returns you have filed and the tax forms cannot choose to file separate returns forthe erroneous refund in any way, orpackage as part of your records. They may be that year after the due date of the return.2. The refund is more than $50,000.helpful in amending filed returns or preparing However, an executor may be able to
future ones. make this change for a deceased spouse.)For example, if you claimed a refund of $100
If you need a copy of a prior year tax return,on your return, but the IRS made an error andIf you need a copy of your return, see Copies ofyou can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506,sent you $1,000, you would not be chargedreturns under What Records Should I Keep,Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is ainterest for the time you held the $900 differ-earlier in this chapter.charge for a copy of a return, which you mustence. You must, however, repay the $900 when
pay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 days tothe IRS asks. Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amendedprocess your request. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct a
return you have already filed. An amended taxIf your main home, principal place ofPast-Due Refund
return cannot be filed electronically under thebusiness, or tax records are located in
e-file system.a Presidentially declared disasterYou can check on the status of your 2005 refund
TIP
area, the charge will be waived. if it has been at least 6 weeks from the date youCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X,
filed your return (3 weeks if you filed electroni-write your income, deductions, and credits asTranscript of tax return.If you just need in-cally). Be sure to have a copy of your 2005 taxyou originally reported them on your return, theformation from your return, you can order areturn available because you will need to knowchanges you are making, and the correctedtranscript by calling 1-800-829-1040, or usingthe filing status, the first SSN shown on theamounts. Then figure the tax on the correctedForm 4506-T, Request for Transcript of Tax Re-return, and the exact whole-dollar amount of theamount of taxable income and the amount youturn. There is no fee for a transcript. refund. To check on your refund, do one of theowe or your refund.You can request the following items. following. If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form
Return transcript.This includes most of 1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on “Where’s
the line items of a tax return as filed with the IRS. any amount you had credited to your estimatedMy Refund.”
Return transcripts are available for the current tax.• Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7year and returns processed during the prior 3 If you cannot pay the full amount due withdays a week for automated refund infor-processing years. Most requests will be your return, you can ask to make monthly install-mation.processed within 10 business days. ment payments. See Installment Agreement,
earlier.• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hoursAccount transcript.This contains informa- If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part ofshown in your form instructions.tion on the financial status of the account, such the overpayment refunded to you, or you canas payments made on the account, penalty as- apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If yousessments, and adjustments made by you or the choose to get a refund, it will be sent separatelyChange of AddressIRS after the return was filed. Return information from any refund shown on your original return.is limited to items such as tax liability and esti-If you have moved, file your return using yourmated tax payments. Account transcripts are Filing Form 1040X. After you finish yournew address.available for most returns. Most requests will be Form 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com-If you move after you filed your return, youprocessed within 20 business days. plete. Do not forget to show the year of yourshould give the IRS clear and concise writtenoriginal return and explain all changes youRecord of account. This is a combinationnotification of your change of address. Send themade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedulesof line item information and later adjustments tonotification to the Internal Revenue Serviceneeded to explain your changes. Mail your Formthe account. This information is available for theCenter serving your old address. You can use1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Centercurrent year and 3 prior tax years. Most requestsForm 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-serving the area where you now live (as shownwill be processed within 20 business days.pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-in the instructions to the form). However, if youing your old address. This will help in forwardingare filing Form 1040X in response to a noticeMore information. For more information onyour check to your new address (unless youyou received from the IRS, mail it to the addressrecordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-chose direct deposit of your refund). shown on the notice. Do not use the addresseskeeping for Individuals. Be sure to include your SSN (and the namelisted at the end of this publication.and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a jointFile a separate form for each tax year in-return) in any correspondence with the IRS.Interest on Refunds volved.
If you are due a refund, you may get interest on Time for filing a claim for refund.Generally,
it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly. you must file your claim for a credit or refund
If the refund is made within 45 days after the within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-What If I Made
due date of your return, no interest will be paid. If nal return or within 2 years after the date you
you file your return after the due date (including paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed
a Mistake?
extensions), no interest will be paid if the refund before the due date (without regard to exten-
is made within 45 days after the date you filed. If sions) are considered filed on the due dateErrors may delay your refund or result in notices
the refund is not made within this 45-day period, (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, orbeing sent to you. If you discover an error, you
interest will be paid from the due date of the legal holiday). These time periods are sus-can file an amended return or claim for refund.
return or from the date you filed, whichever is pended while you are financially disabled, dis-
later. cussed later.
Amended Returns andAccepting a refund check does not change If the last day for claiming a credit or refund is
your right to claim an additional refund and inter- a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you canClaims for Refund
est. File your claim within the period of time that file the claim on the next business day.
applies. See Amended Returns and Claims forYou should correct your return if, after you have If you do not file a claim within this period,
Refund, later. If you do not accept a refund filed it, you find that: you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Late-filed return.If you were due a refund are unable to manage your financial affairs be- If your claim is disallowed, you will receive an
but you did not file a return, you generally must cause of a medically determinable physical or explanation of why it was disallowed.
file your return within 3 years from the date the mental impairment which can be expected toTaking your claim to court.You can sue for areturn was due (including extensions) to get that result in death or which has lasted or can berefund in court, but you must first file a timelyrefund. Generally, your return must be post- expected to last for a continuous period of notclaim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows yourmarked no later than 3 years from the date the less than 12 months. However, you are notclaim or does not act on your claim within 6return was due (including extensions). For infor- treated as financially disabled during any periodmonths after you file it, you can then take yourmation on postmarks, see Filing on time, under your spouse or any other person is authorized toclaim to court. For information on the burden ofWhen Do I Have To File, earlier. act on your behalf in financial matters. proof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556.To claim that you are financially disabled,The IRS provides a fast method to move yourLimit on amount of refund.If you file youryou must send in the following written state-claim to court if:claim within 3 years after the date you filed yourments with your claim for refund.
return, the credit or refund cannot be more than • You are filing a claim for a credit or refund1. A statement from your qualified physicianthe part of the tax paid within the 3-year period based solely on contested income tax orthat includes:(plus any extension of time for filing your return) on estate tax or gift tax issues considered
immediately before you filed the claim. This time in your previously examined returns, anda. The name and a description of yourperiod is suspended while you are financially physical or mental impairment, • You want to take your case to court in-disabled, discussed later.
stead of appealing it within the IRS.b. The physician’s medical opinion that theTax paid. Payments, including estimated impairment prevented you from manag-tax payments, made before the due date (with- When you file your claim with the IRS, you geting your financial affairs,out regard to extensions) of the original return the fast method by requesting in writing that your
are considered paid on the due date. For exam-c. The physician’s medical opinion that theclaim be immediately rejected. A notice of claim
ple, income tax withheld during the year is con-impairment was or can be expected todisallowance will then be promptly sent to you.
sidered paid on the due date of the return, Aprilresult in death, or that its duration hasYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of
15 for most taxpayers. lasted, or can be expected to last, atthe notice of disallowance to file a refund suit in
least 12 months, the United States District Court having jurisdic-
Example 1. You made estimated tax pay- tion or in the United States Court of Federald. The specific time period (to the best ofments of $500 and got an automatic extension of Claims.the physician’s knowledge), andtime to August 15, 2003, to file your 2002 in-
Interest on refund.If you receive a refundcome tax return. When you filed your return one. The following certification signed by the
because of your amended return, interest will bethat date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On physician: “I hereby certify that, to the
paid on it from the due date of your originalAugust 15, 2006, you filed an amended return best of my knowledge and belief, the
return or the date you filed your original return,and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filedabove representations are true, correct,
whichever is later, to the date you filed theyour claim within 3 years after you filed your and complete.”
amended return. However, if the refund is notoriginal return, you can get a refund of up to
made within 45 days after you file the amended$700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the2. A statement made by the person signing
return, interest will be paid up to the date the4-month extension period immediately before the claim for credit or refund that no per-
refund is paid.you filed the claim. son, including your spouse, was author-
ized to act on your behalf in financialReduced refund. Your refund may be re-Example 2. The situation is the same as inmatters during the period of disability (orduced by an additional tax liability that has beenExample 1, except you filed your return on Octo-the exact dates that a person was author-assessed against you.ber 27, 2003, 21/2 months after the extension ized to act for you). Also, your refund may be reduced byperiod ended. You paid an additional $200 on amounts you owe for past-due child support,that date. On October 27, 2006, you filed anExceptions for special types of refunds.If debts to another federal agency, or for state tax.amended return and claimed a refund of $700.you file a claim for one of the items listed below,If your spouse owes these debts, see OffsetAlthough you filed your claim within 3 years fromthe dates and limits discussed earlier may notagainst debts, under Refunds, earlier, for thethe date you filed your original return, the refundapply. These items, and where to get more infor-correct refund procedures to follow.was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3mation, are as follows.
years plus the 4-month extension period imme- Effect on state tax liability.If your return is
• Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts indiately before you filed the claim. The estimated changed for any reason, it may affect your state
chapter 14.)tax of $500 paid before that period cannot be income tax liability. This includes changes made
refunded or credited. as a result of an examination of your return by• Worthless security. (See Worthless securi-
the IRS. Contact your state tax agency for moreties in chapter 14.)
If you file a claim more than 3 years after information.
• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-you file your return, the credit or refund cannot
tion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu-be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years Penaltiesals.)immediately before you file the claim.
• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-The law provides penalties for failure to file re-Example. You filed your 2002 tax return oncation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)turns or pay taxes as required.April 15, 2003. You paid taxes of $500. On for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.)
November 3, 2004, after an examination of your
• Carryback of certain business tax credits.2002 return, you had to pay an additional tax of Civil Penalties(See Form 3800, General Business$200. On May 10, 2006, you file a claim for a
Credit.)refund of $300. However, because you filed your If you do not file your return and pay your tax by
claim more than 3 years after you filed your the due date, you may have to pay a penalty.• Claim based on an agreement with the
return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you You may also have to pay a penalty if youIRS extending the period for assessment
paid during the 2 years immediately before you substantially understate your tax, understate aof tax.
filed your claim. reportable transaction, file a frivolous return, or
fail to supply your SSN or individual taxpayerFinancially disabled.The time periods for Processing claims for refund.Claims are identification number. If you provide fraudulentclaiming a refund are suspended for the period usually processed shortly after they are filed.information on your return, you may have to payin which you are financially disabled. For a joint Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal-a civil fraud penalty.income tax return, only one spouse has to be lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is
financially disabled for the time period to be examined, the procedures are the same as inFiling late.If you do not file your return by the
suspended. You are financially disabled if you the examination of a tax return. due date (including extensions), you may have
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is ordinary and reasonable care in preparing a You will have to pay the penalty if you filed
usually 5% for each month or part of a month return. Negligence also includes failure to keep this kind of return because of a frivolous position
that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The adequate books and records. You will not have on your part or a desire to delay or interfere with
penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea- the administration of federal income tax laws.
date (without regard to extensions). sonable basis for a position you took. This includes altering or striking out the
preprinted language above the space providedFraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,The term “disregard” includes any careless,for your signature.the penalty is 15% for each month or part of areckless, or intentional disregard.
This penalty is added to any other penaltymonth that your return is late, up to a maximumAdequate disclosure. You can avoid the provided by law.of 75%. penalty for disregard of rules or regulations if
The penalty must be paid in full upon noticeReturn over 60 days late.If you file youryou adequately disclose on your return a posi-
and demand from IRS even if you protest thereturn more than 60 days after the due date ortion that has at least a reasonable basis. See
penalty.extended due date, the minimum penalty is theDisclosure statement, later.
smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
This exception will not apply to an item that isException. You will not have to pay the Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax onattributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will notpenalty if you show that you failed to file on time your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of theapply if you fail to keep adequate books andbecause of reasonable cause and not because underpayment due to fraud will be added to yourrecords, or substantiate items properly.of willful neglect. tax.
Substantial understatement of income tax.Joint return.The fraud penalty on a jointYou understate your tax if the tax shown on yourreturn does not apply to a spouse unless somePaying tax late. You will have to pay a return is less than the correct tax. The under-part of the underpayment is due to the fraud offailure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of yourstatement is substantial if it is more than thethat spouse.unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month,larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-
after the due date that the tax is not paid. Thisever, the amount of the understatement may be
penalty does not apply during the automaticreduced to the extent the understatement is dueFailure to supply social security number.If6-month extension of time to file period if youto: you do not include your SSN or the SSN ofpaid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on or another person where required on a return,before the due date of your return and pay the statement, or other document, you will be sub-1. Substantial authority, orbalance when you file the return. ject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You willThe monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penalty 2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do notis half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if an sis. give your SSN to another person when it isinstallment agreement is in effect for that month. required on a return, statement, or other docu-If an item on your return is attributable to a taxYou must have filed your return by the due date ment.shelter, there is no reduction for an adequate(including extensions) to qualify for this reduceddisclosure. However, there is a reduction for aFor example, if you have a bank account thatpenalty. position with substantial authority, but only if youearns interest, you must give your SSN to theIf a notice of intent to levy is issued, the ratereasonably believed that your tax treatment wasbank. The number must be shown on the Formwill increase to 1% at the start of the first monthmore likely than not the proper treatment.1099-INT or other statement the bank sendsbeginning at least 10 days after the day that the you. If you do not give the bank your SSN, youSubstantial authority.Whether there is ornotice is issued. If a notice and demand for will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also maywas substantial authority for the tax treatment ofimmediate payment is issued, the rate will in- be subject to “backup” withholding of incomean item depends on the facts and circum-crease to 1% at the start of the first month tax. See chapter 4.)stances. Some of the items that may be consid-beginning after the day that the notice and de-
ered are court opinions, Treasury regulations,mand is issued. You will not have to pay the penalty if you are
revenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no-able to show that the failure was due to reasona-This penalty cannot be more than 25% oftices and announcements issued by the IRS andble cause and not willful neglect.your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay thepublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin thatpenalty if you can show that you had a goodinvolve the same or similar circumstances asreason for not paying your tax on time. Failure to furnish tax shelter registrationyours.
number. A person who sells (or otherwiseDisclosure statement.To adequately dis-transfers) to you an interest in a tax shelter mustCombined penalties. If both the failure-to-fileclose the relevant facts about your tax treatmentgive you the tax shelter registration number orpenalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-of an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State-be subject to a $100 penalty. If you claim anycussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (orment. You must also have a reasonable basisdeduction, credit, or other tax benefit because of15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by thefor treating the item the way you did. the tax shelter, you must attach Form 8271,failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your
Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter Registrationreturn more than 60 days after the due date orIn cases of substantial understatement only,
Number, to your return to report this number.extended due date, the minimum penalty is theitems that meet the requirements of Revenue
You will have to pay a penalty of $250 for eachsmaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.Procedure 2004-73 (or later update) are consid-
failure to report a tax shelter registration numberered adequately disclosed on your return with-
on your return. The penalty can be excused ifout filing Form 8275.Accuracy-related penalty.You may have to you have a reasonable cause for not reportingpay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpayUse Form 8275-R, Regulation Disclosurethe number.your tax because: Statement, to disclose items or positions con-
trary to regulations.1. You show negligence or disregard of the Criminal PenaltiesReasonable cause. You will not have torules or regulations, or
pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea-You may be subject to criminal prosecution2. You substantially understate your incomesonable cause) for the way you treated an item.(brought to trial) for actions such as:tax. You must also show that you acted in good faith.
The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay- 1. Tax evasion,ment. The penalty will not be figured on any partFrivolous return.You may have to pay a pen-of an underpayment on which the fraud penalty 2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-alty of $500 if you file a frivolous return. A frivo-(discussed later) is charged. mation, or pay any tax due,lous return is one that does not include enough
Negligence or disregard.The term “negli- information to figure the correct tax or that con-3. Fraud and false statements, or
gence” includes a failure to make a reasonable tains information clearly showing that the tax4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.attempt to comply with the tax law or to exercise you reported is substantially incorrect.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa- spouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status is
married filing separately for that year.rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance decree. State law governs Married persons living apart.If you live2. whether you are married or legally separatedapart from your spouse and meet certain tests,under a divorce or separate maintenance de-you may be considered unmarried. If this appliescree. to you, you can file as head of household even
though you are not divorced or legally sepa-Filing Status Divorced persons. If you are divorced
rated. If you qualify to file as head of householdunder a final decree by the last day of the year,
instead of as married filing separately, youryou are considered unmarried for the whole
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxyear.What’s New for 2005 may be lower, and you may be able to claim theDivorce and remarriage. If you obtain a earned income credit. See Head of Household,
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filingHead of household. Beginning in 2005, you later.
tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at thewill use new rules to determine whether some-
time of divorce you intended to and did remarryone is your qualifying person so you can claim
each other in the next tax year, you and yourhead of household filing status. To be your quali-
spouse must file as married individuals.fying person, a child generally must be your Single“qualifying child.” See Head of Household. Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court
decree of annulment, which holds that no validYour filing status is single if, on the last day ofKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.marriage ever existed, you are considered un-the year, you are unmarried or legally separatedThis Act provides tax relief for persons affectedmarried even if you filed joint returns for earlierfrom your spouse under a divorce or separateby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may beyears. You must file Form 1040X, Amended maintenance decree, and you do not qualify forable to maintain head of household filing status.U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin-another filing status. To determine your maritalSee Publication 4492. gle or head of household status for each tax yearstatus on the last day of the year, see Marital
affected by the annulment that is not closed byStatus, earlier.
the statute of limitations for filing a tax return.Your filing status may be single if you were
The statute of limitations generally does not ex-widowed before January 1, 2005, and did notIntroduction pire until 3 years after your original return wasremarry in 2005. However, you might be able to
filed.This chapter helps you determine which filing use another filing status that will give you a lower
status to use. There are five filing statuses: tax. See Head of Household and QualifyingHead of household or qualifying widow(er)
Widow(er) With Dependent Child to see if youwith dependent child.If you are considered• Single, qualify.       unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
• Married Filing Jointly, household or as a qualifying widow(er) with aHow to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if youdependent child. See Head of Household and• Married Filing Separately, have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or• Head of Household, and see if you qualify. Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent 1040, show your filing status as single by check-Married persons. If you are considered mar-Child. ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column ofried for the whole year, you and your spouse canthe Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa-file a joint return, or you can file separate re-tion Worksheet to figure your tax.If more than one filing status appliesturns.to you, choose the one that will give
Considered married. You are consideredyou the lowest tax.
TIP
married for the whole year if on the last day ofYou must determine your filing status before
your tax year you and your spouse meet any oneyou can determine your filing requirements Married Filing Jointlyof the following tests.(chapter 1), standard deduction (chapter 20),
and correct tax (chapter 30). You also use your You can choose married filing jointly as your1. You are married and living together asfiling status in determining whether you are eligi- filing status if you are married and both you andhusband and wife.ble to claim certain deductions and credits. your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint
return, you report your combined income and2. You are living together in a common law
deduct your combined allowable expenses. Youmarriage that is recognized in the stateUseful Items
can file a joint return even if one of you had nowhere you now live or in the state whereYou may want to see:
income or deductions.the common law marriage began.
If you and your spouse decide to file a jointPublication 3. You are married and living apart, but notreturn, your tax may be lower than your com-legally separated under a decree of di-❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourvorce or separate maintenance.and Filing Information standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-
4. You are separated under an interlocutorytions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposesbenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.❏ 555 Community Property of filing a joint return, you are not consid-If you and your spouse each haveered divorced. income, you may want to figure your
tax both on a joint return and on sepa-
TIP
Spouse died. If your spouse died during therate returns (using the filing status of marriedyear, you are considered married for the wholeMarital Status filing separately). Choose the method that givesyear for filing status purposes. the two of you the lower combined tax.    
If you did not remarry before the end of theIn general, your filing status depends on
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfHow to file.If you file as married filing jointly,whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youried. A marriage means only a legal union be-
years, you may be entitled to the special benefitshave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,tween a man and a woman as husband and
described later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withand meet other requirements, you can file Formwife.
Dependent Child. 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,
If you remarried before the end of the taxUnmarried persons. You are considered un- show this filing status by checking the box on
year, you can file a joint return with your newmarried for the whole year if, on the last day of line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of the
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 19

Page 22 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Table or Section B of the Tax Computation enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area unless you qualify for head of household status,
Worksheet to figure your tax. where you sign the return. discussed next.
You may be able to choose head of house-Spouse away from home. If your spouse isSpouse died during the year.If your spouse hold filing status if you live apart from youraway from home, you should prepare the return,died during the year, you are considered mar- spouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredsign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatried for the whole year and can choose married unmarried (explained later, under Head ofit can be filed on time.filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouse Household). This can apply to you even if youdied, earlier, for more information. Injury or disease prevents signing.If your are not divorced or legally separated. If you
spouse cannot sign because of disease or injuryqualify to file as head of household, instead of asDivorced persons. If you are divorced under
and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’smarried filing separately, your tax may be lower,a final decree by the last day of the year, you are
name in the proper space on the return followedyou may be able to claim the earned incomeconsidered unmarried for the whole year and
by the words “By (your name), Husband (orcredit and certain other credits, and your stan-you cannot choose married filing jointly as your
Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro-dard deduction will be higher. The head offiling status.
vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-household filing status allows you to choose the
ment, signed by you, to the return. The standard deduction even if your spouse chooses
Filing a Joint Return statement should include the form number of theto itemize deductions. See Head of Household,
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonlater, for more information.Both you and your spouse must include all ofyour spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse Unless you are required to file sepa-your income, exemptions, and deductions onhas agreed to your signing for him or her. rately, you should figure your tax bothyour joint return.
Signing as guardian of spouse.If you are ways (on a joint return and on sepa-
TIP
Accounting period.Both of you must use thethe guardian of your spouse who is mentallyrate returns). This way you can make sure yousame accounting period, but you can use differ-incompetent, you can sign the return for yourare using the filing status that results in theent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-spouse as guardian. lowest combined tax. However, you will gener-ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1. ally pay more combined tax on separate returnsSpouse in combat zone. If your spouse isthan you would on a joint return for the reasonsJoint responsibility.Both of you may be heldunable to sign the return because he or she islisted under Special Rules, later.responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxserving in a combat zone (such as the Persian
and any interest or penalty due on your jointGulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or aHow to file.If you file a separate return, you
return. One spouse may be held responsible forqualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her-generally report only your own income, exemp-
all the tax due even if all the income was earnedzegovina, Croatia, and Macedonia), and you dotions, credits, and deductions on your individual
by the other spouse. not have a power of attorney or other statement,return. You can claim an exemption for your
you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signedspouse if your spouse had no gross income andDivorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly
statement to your return that explains that yourwas not the dependent of another person. How-and individually responsible for any tax, interest,
spouse is serving in a combat zone. For moreever, if your spouse had any gross income orand penalties due on a joint return filed before
information on special tax rules for persons whowas the dependent of someone else, you cannotyour divorce. This responsibility may apply even
are serving in a combat zone, or who are inclaim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-if your divorce decree states that your former
missing status as a result of serving in a combatrate return.spouse will be responsible for any amounts due
zone, get Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Tax  If you file as married filing separately, youon previously filed joint returns.
Guide. can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this
Relief from joint liability.In some cases, filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofOther reasons spouse cannot sign.  Ifone spouse may be relieved of joint liability for either form. You also must enter your spouse’syour spouse cannot sign the joint return for anytax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for social security number and full name in theother reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyitems of the other spouse that were incorrectly spaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalreported on the joint return. You can ask for rately column of the Tax Table or Section C ofdocument giving you permission to act for yourrelief no matter how small the liability. the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure yourspouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyThere are three types of relief available. tax.of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,
1. Innocent spouse relief, which applies to all Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-
joint filers. tative. Special Rules
2. Separation of liability, which applies to joint If you choose married filing separately as yourNonresident alien or dual-status alien.Afilers who are divorced, widowed, legally filing status, the following special rules apply.joint return generally cannot be filed if eitherseparated, or have not lived together for Because of these special rules, you will usuallyspouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringthe 12 months ending on the date election pay more tax on a separate return than if youthe tax year. However, if one spouse was aof this relief is filed. used another filing status that you qualify for.nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was
married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of3. Equitable relief, which applies to all joint
the year, the spouses can choose to file a jointfilers who do not qualify for innocent 1. Your tax rate generally will be higher thanreturn. If you do file a joint return, you and yourspouse relief or separation of liability and it would be on a joint return.spouse are both treated as U.S. residents for theto married couples filing separate returns
entire tax year. For information on this choice,in community property states. 2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
see chapter 1 of Publication 519. ternative minimum tax will be half that al- You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno- lowed to a joint return filer.cent Spouse Relief, to request any of these
kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse 3. You cannot take the credit for child and
Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who dependent care expenses in most cases,
Married Filingmay qualify for them. and the amount that you can exclude from
income under an employer’s dependentSigning a joint return.For a return to be Separately care assistance program is limited toconsidered a joint return, both husband and wife $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a jointgenerally must sign the return. You can choose married filing separately as return). For more information about these
your filing status if you are married. This filingSpouse died before signing. If your expenses, the credit, and the exclusion,
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-spouse died before signing the return, the exec- see chapter 32.
sible only for your own tax or if it results in lessutor or administrator must sign the return for 4. You cannot take the earned income credit.tax than filing a joint return.your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has
yet been appointed as executor or administrator, If you and your spouse do not agree to file a 5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for
you can sign the return for your spouse and joint return, you may have to use this filing status adoption expenses in most cases.
Page 20 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 23 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. You cannot take the education credits (theJoint Return After 1. You file a separate return, defined earlierHope credit and the lifetime learningSeparate Returns under Joint Return After Separate Returns.credit), the deduction for student loan inter-
est, or the tuition and fees deduction.You can change your filing status by filing an2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
amended return using Form 1040X. ing up your home for the tax year.7. You cannot exclude any interest income If you or your spouse (or both of you) file afrom qualified U.S. savings bonds that you 3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur-separate return, you generally can change to aused for higher education expenses. ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Yourjoint return any time within 3 years from the due
spouse is considered to live in your home8. If you lived with your spouse at any time date of the separate return or returns. This does
even if he or she is temporarily absent duenot include any extensions. A separate returnduring the tax year:
to special circumstances. See Temporaryincludes a return filed by you or your spouse
a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld- absences, under Qualifying Person, later.claiming married filing separately, single, or
erly or the disabled. head of household filing status. 4. Your home was the main home of your
b. You will have to include in income more child, stepchild, or eligible foster child for
(up to 85%) of any social security or more than half the year. (See Home ofSeparate Returns Afterequivalent railroad retirement benefits qualifying person, under Qualifying Per-Joint Returnyou received, and son, later, for rules applying to a child’s
birth, death, or temporary absence duringc. You cannot roll over amounts from aOnce you file a joint return, you cannot choose
the year.)traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. to file separate returns for that year after the due
date of the return. 5. You must be able to claim an exemption9. The following deductions and credits are for the child. However, you meet this test ifException. A personal representative for areduced at income levels that are half you cannot claim the exemption only be-decedent can change from a joint return electedthose for a joint return: cause the noncustodial parent can claimby the surviving spouse to a separate return forthe child using the rules described in Chil-a. The child tax credit, the decedent. The personal representative hasdren of divorced or separated parents1 year from the due date of the return to makeb. The retirement savings contributions under Qualifying Child in chapter 3, or inthe change. See Publication 559 for more infor-credit, Support Test for Children of Divorced ormation on filing a return for a decedent. Separated Parents under Qualifying Rela-c. Itemized deductions, and
tive in chapter 3. The general rules ford. The deduction for personal exemptions.Head of Household claiming an exemption for a dependent are
explained under Exemptions for Depen-10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500You may be able to file as head of household ifdents in chapter 3.(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-you meet all the following requirements.
turn). If you were considered married for1. You are unmarried or “considered unmar-
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you part of the year and lived in a commu-ried” on the last day of the year.
nity property state (listed earlier undercannot claim the standard deduction. If you CAUTION
!
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-Married Filing Separately), special rules maycan claim the standard deduction, your ba-
ing up a home for the year. apply in determining your income and expenses.sic standard deduction is half the amount
allowed on a joint return. See Publication 555 for more information.3. A “qualifying person” lived with you in the
home for more than half the year (except
Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-for temporary absences, such as school).Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). ered unmarried for head of household purposesHowever, if the “qualifying person” is yourYou may not be able to deduct all or part of yourdependent parent, he or she does not if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anycontributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourhave to live with you. See Special rule fortime during the year and you do not choose tospouse was covered by an employee retirementparent, later, under Qualifying Person. treat your nonresident spouse as a residentplan at work during the year. Your deduction is alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingreduced or eliminated if your income is more If you qualify to file as head of house-person for head of household purposes. Youthan a certain amount. This amount is much hold, your tax rate usually will bemust have another qualifying person and meetlower for married individuals who file separatelylower than the rates for single or mar-
TIP
the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofand lived together at any time during the year.ried filing separately. You will also receive ahousehold.For more information, see How Much Can You higher standard deduction than if you file asDeduct in chapter 17. Earned income credit.Even if you are con-single or married filing separately.
sidered unmarried for head of household pur-
Rental activity losses.If you actively partici- poses because you are married to a nonresidentKidnapped child. A child may qualify you to
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that alien, you are still considered married for pur-file as head of household even if the child has
produced a loss, you generally can deduct thebeen kidnapped. For more information, see poses of the earned income credit (unless you
loss from your nonpassive income, up to Publication 501. meet the five tests listed earlier). You are not
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. entitled to the credit unless you file a joint return
How to file.If you file as head of household,However, married persons filing separate re- with your spouse and meet other qualifications.
you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.turns who lived together at any time during the See chapter 36 for more information.
Indicate your choice of this filing status byyear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-
Choice to treat spouse as resident.Youchecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theried persons filing separate returns who lived
are considered married if you choose to treatHead of household column of the Tax Table orapart at all times during the year are each al-
your spouse as a resident alien.Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet tolowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance
figure your tax.for losses from passive real estate activities.
See Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9. Keeping Up a Home
Considered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, youCommunity property states.If you live in Ari-
must pay more than half of the cost of keepingzona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,To qualify for head of household status, you
up a home for the year. You can determineNew Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsinmust be either unmarried or considered unmar-
whether you paid more than half of the cost ofand file separately, your income may be consid-ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-
ered separate income or community income for keeping up a home by using the worksheetered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if
income tax purposes. See Publication 555. shown on the next page.you meet all the following tests.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Costs you include.Include in the cost of up- the main home for the entire year for your fatherCost of Keeping Up a Home
keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest, or mother. You are keeping up a main home for
real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re- your father or mother if you pay more than half
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home orAmount
home for the elderly.You Total Costs you do not include.Do not include inPaid Cost Temporary absences. You and your quali-the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
Property taxes $ $ fying person are considered to live togethereducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
even if one or both of you are temporarily absentMortgage interest expense surance, or transportation. Also, do not include
from your home due to special circumstancesRent the rental value of a home you own or the value
such as illness, education, business, vacation,of your services or those of a member of yourUtility charges
or military service. It must be reasonable tohousehold.Upkeep and repairs
assume that the absent person will return to theProperty insurance
home after the temporary absence. You mustFood consumed
Qualifying Person continue to keep up the home during the ab-on the premises
sence.Other household expenses See Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person.
Totals $$ Any person not described in Table 2-1 is notDeath or birth.You may be eligible to file as
a qualifying person. head of household if the individual who qualifies
Minus total amount you () you for this filing status is born or dies during theHome of qualifying person.Generally, thepaid year. You must have provided more than half ofqualifying person must live with you for morethe cost of keeping up a home that was thethan half of the year.Amount others paid $ individual’s main home for more than half the
Special rule for parent.If your qualifyingyear or, if less, the period during which the
person is your father or mother, you may beindividual lived.
If the total amount you paid is more than the amounteligible to file as head of household even if yourothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying morefather or mother does not live with you. How-Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,than half the cost of keeping up the home.
ever, you must be able to claim an exemption for for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in
your father or mother. Also, you must pay more an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-
than half the cost of keeping up a home that was ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
Caution: See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not youqualifying child (such as a son,
can claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived
with you more than half the yearhe or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.and meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person.3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her a qualifying person.
5qualifying relative 4 who is your
father or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative 4 other than
year, and you can claim an exemption foryour father or mother (such as a
him or her 7grandparent, brother, or sister
who meets certain tests)
6
he or she did not live with you more than not a qualifying person.
half the year
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term “qualifying child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents in chapter 3. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term
“qualifying child” for head of household filing status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only
because of the rules described under Children of divorced or separated parents under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the
custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child
is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the requirements described under Married child in this chapter are met.
4The term “qualifying relative” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents in chapter 3.
5See Special rule for parent in this chapter for an additional requirement.
6A person who is your qualifying relative only because he or she lived with you all year as a member of your household is not a qualifying
person.
7If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See
Multiple Support Agreement, in chapter 3.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for the year until her death was $6,000. You paid
1. You were entitled to file a joint return with$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your
Qualifying Widow(er) your spouse for the year your spouse died.brother made no other payments toward your
It does not matter whether you actuallymother’s support. Your mother had no income.
filed a joint return.With Dependent ChildBecause you paid more than half the cost of
keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu- 2. Your spouse died in 2003 or 2004 and youIf your spouse died in 2005, you can use marriedary 1 until her death, and you can claim an did not remarry before the end of 2005.filing jointly as your filing status for 2005 if youexemption for her, you can file as a head of
3. You have a child or stepchild for whom youotherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofhousehold.
can claim an exemption (This does not in-death is the last year for which you can file jointlyMarried child.Your child who is married at the clude a foster child).with your deceased spouse. See Married Filingend of the year generally cannot be your qualify-
4. You paid more than half the cost of keep-Jointly, earlier.ing person unless you can claim the child as a
ing up a home that is the main home fordependent. However, the child is a qualifyingYou may be eligible to use qualifying you and that child for the entire year, ex-person if all three of the following requirementswidow(er) with dependent child as your filingcept for temporary absences. See Tempo-are met. status for 2 years following the year your spouserary absences and Keeping Up a Home,
died. For example, if your spouse died in 2004,• The child is your qualifying child (as de- discussed earlier under Head of House-
fined under Exemptions for Dependents) and you have not remarried, you may be able tohold.
in chapter 3. use this filing status for 2005 and 2006.
As mentioned earlier, this filing statusThis filing status entitles you to use joint• The child does not file a joint return, un-
is only available for 2 years followingless the return is filed only as a claim forreturn tax rates and the highest standard deduc- the year your spouse died.CAUTION
!
refund and no tax liability would exist fortion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
either spouse if they had filed separateThis status does not entitle you to file a jointExample.  John Reed’s wife died in 2003.returns. return. John has not remarried. During 2004 and 2005,• The child is a U.S. citizen or resident, or a he continued to keep up a home for himself andresident of Canada or Mexico. (This re- his child (for whom he can claim an exemption).How to file.If you file as qualifying widow(er)quirement is met if you are a U.S. citizen For 2003 he was entitled to file a joint return forwith dependent child, you can use either Formand the child is an adopted child who lived himself and his deceased wife. For 2004 and1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing statuswith you all year as a member of your 2005, he can file as qualifying widower with aby checking the box on line 5 of either form. Usehousehold.) dependent child. After 2005 he can file as headthe Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableof household if he qualifies.or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet
Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as ato figure your tax.
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the
child who qualifies you for this filing status isEligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourborn or dies during the year. You must have
2005 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
pendent child if you meet all of the followinga home that was the child’s main home during
tests. the entire part of the year he or she was alive.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Social security number (SSN) requirementYour Spouse’s Exemption
for dependents — You must list the social
Your spouse is never considered your depen-security number of any dependent for
3. dent.whom you claim an exemption.
Joint return.On a joint return you can claim
Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxableone exemption for yourself and one for your
Personal income. Generally, you can deduct $3,200 forspouse.
each exemption you claim in 2005. But, you may
Separate return.If you file a separate return,lose the benefit of part or all of your exemptionsExemptions and you can claim the exemption for your spouseif your adjusted gross income is above a certain
only if your spouse had no gross income, is notamount. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
filing a return, and was not the dependent ofDependents another taxpayer. This is true even if the otherHow you claim an exemption.  How you
taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse asclaim an exemption on your tax return depends
a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is aon which form you file.
nonresident alien.If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemptionWhat’s New for 2005
amount is combined with the standard deductionDeath of spouse. If your spouse died duringamount and entered on line 5.Exemption for dependent. Beginning in the year, you generally can claim your spouse’s If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, follow2005, you will use new rules to determine exemption under the rules just explained underthe instructions for the form. The total number ofwhether you can claim an exemption for a de- Joint return and Separate return.exemptions you can claim is the total in the boxpendent. You can claim an exemption for a If you remarried during the year, you cannoton line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A)“qualifying child” or a “qualifying relative.” See take an exemption for your deceased spouse.or line 42 (Form 1040) by multiplying the totalExemptions for Dependents. If you are a surviving spouse without grossnumber of exemptions shown in the box on lineincome and you remarry in the year your spouseExemption amount. The amount you can de- 6d by $3,200. If your adjusted gross income isdied, you can be claimed as an exemption onduct for each exemption has increased from more than $109,475, see Phaseout of Exemp- both the final separate return of your deceased$3,100 in 2004 to $3,200 in 2005. tions, later. spouse and the separate return of your new
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withExemption phaseout. You lose all or part ofUseful Items your new spouse, you can be claimed as anthe benefit of your exemptions if your adjustedYou may want to see: exemption only on that return.gross income is above a certain amount. The
amount at which this phaseout begins depends Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-Publicationon your filing status. For 2005, the phaseout tained a final decree of divorce or separatebegins at $109,475 for married persons filing❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, maintenance by the end of the year, you cannotseparately, $145,950 for single individuals, and Filing Information take your former spouse’s exemption. This rule$182,450 for heads of household, and $218,950 applies even if you provided all of your formerfor married persons filing jointly or qualifyingForm (and Instructions) spouse’s support.widow(er)s. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later. ❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration
Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. ❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption forThis Act provides tax relief for persons affected Child of Divorced or Separatedby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be Exemptions forParentsable to claim a $500 exemption if you housed an
individual displaced by Hurricane Katrina. You Dependents
may also be able to claim a student even if he or
she was prevented from completing the normal You are allowed one exemption for each person
school term. See Publication 4492. you can claim as a dependent. You can claim anExemptions
exemption for a dependent even if your depen-
dent files a return.There are two types of exemptions: personal
Beginning in 2005, the term “dependent”exemptions and exemptions for dependents.
means:While each is worth the same amount ($3,200Introduction
for 2005), different rules apply to each type.• A qualifying child, orThis chapter discusses exemptions. The follow-
ing topics will be explained. • A qualifying relative.Personal Exemptions• Personal exemptions — You generally The terms “qualifying child” and “qualifying rela-
can take one for yourself and, if you areYou are generally allowed one exemption fortive” are defined later.
married, one for your spouse. yourself and, if you are married, one exemptionYou can claim an exemption for a qualifyingfor your spouse. These are called personal ex-• Exemptions for dependents — You gener- child or qualifying relative only if these threeemptions.ally can take an exemption for each of tests are met.
your dependents. A dependent is your
qualifying child or qualifying relative. If you 1. Dependent taxpayer test.
Your Own Exemptionare entitled to claim an exemption for a 2. Joint return test.dependent, that dependent cannot claim aYou can take one exemption for yourself unlesspersonal exemption on his or her own tax 3. Citizen or resident test.you can be claimed as a dependent by anotherreturn. taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim These three tests are explained in detail later.
• Phaseout of exemptions — You get less you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp- All the requirements for claiming an exemp-
of a deduction when your adjusted gross tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer does tion for a dependent are summarized in Table
income goes above a certain amount. not actually claim you as a dependent. 3-1.
Page 24 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 27 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution: This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund and there
would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns.
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada
or Mexico, for some part of the year. 1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the qualifying
foster child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, child of anyone else.
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, (b) ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with you,
under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-time student, or or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. household.
2
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 3. The person’s gross income for the year must be less than
year.2 $3,200.3
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her 4. You must provide more than half of the person’s total support
own support for the year. for the year. 4
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim the
child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There is an exception for multiple support agreements.
Dependent not allowed a personal Example. You supported your 18-year-old If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
exemption. If you can claim an ex-daughter, and she lived with you all year while was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even if
emption for your dependent, the de-her husband was in the Armed Forces. The the other parent was a nonresident alien and theCAUTION
!
pendent cannot claim his or her own exemptioncouple files a joint return. Even though your child was born in a foreign country. If so, this test
on his or her own tax return. This is true even ifdaughter is your qualifying child, you cannot is met.
you do not claim the dependent’s exemption ontake an exemption for her. Foreign students’ place of residence.For-your return or if the exemption will be reduced orException. The joint return test does not eign students brought to this country under aeliminated under the phaseout rule describedapply if a joint return is filed by the dependent qualified international education exchange pro-under Phaseout of Exemptions, later. and his or her spouse merely as a claim for gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If these refund and no tax liability would exist for either porary period generally are not U.S. residents
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp- spouse on separate returns. and do not meet this test. You cannot claim an
tions for them. exemption for them. However, if you provided a
Example. Your son and his wife each hadhome for a foreign student, you may be able toChild tax credit.You may be entitled to a childless than $3,000 of wages and no unearnedtake a charitable contribution deduction. Seetax credit for each qualifying child who wasincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.Expenses Paid for Student Living With You inunder age 17 at the end of the year. For moreTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed achapter 24.information, see the instructions in your taxjoint return to get a refund. You are not disquali-forms package. U.S. national.A U.S. national is an individualfied from claiming their exemptions just becausewho, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or herthey filed a joint return. allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationals
include American Samoans and Northern Mari-
Dependent Taxpayer Test ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-Citizen or Resident Test tionals instead of U.S. citizens.If you could be claimed as a dependent by an-
other person, you cannot claim anyone else as aYou cannot claim a person as a dependent un-
dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child orless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident,Qualifying Child
qualifying relative, you cannot claim that personU.S. national, or a resident of Canada or Mexico,
as a dependent. for some part of the year. However, there is anThere are five tests that must be met for a child
If you are filing a joint return and your spouseexception for certain adopted children, as ex-to be your qualifying child. The five tests are:
could be claimed as a dependent by someoneplained next.
1. Relationship,else, you and your spouse cannot claim anyAdopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen whodependents on your joint return. 2. Age,has legally adopted a child who is not a U.S.
citizen, U.S. resident, or U.S. national, this test is3. Residency,
met if the child lived with you as a member ofJoint Return Test 4. Support, andyour household all year. This also applies if the
child was lawfully placed with you for legal adop-5. Special test for qualifying child of moreYou generally cannot claim a married person as
tion. than one person.a dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Child’s place of residence.Children usuallyThese tests are explained next.
are citizens or residents of the country of their
parents.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 25

Page 28 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your This treatment applies for all years until theRelationship Test
child is permanently and totally disabled if both child is returned. However, the last year this
To meet this test, a child must be: of the following apply. treatment can apply is the earlier of:
• Your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible fos-• He or she cannot engage in any substan-1. The year there is a determination that the
ter child, or a descendant (for example, tial gainful activity because of a physical orchild is dead, or
your grandchild) of any of them, or mental condition.
2. The year the child would have reached
• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-• A doctor determines the condition has age 18.
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-lasted or can be expected to last continu-
dant (for example, your niece or nephew) ously for at least a year or can lead toChildren of divorced or separated parents.
of any of them. death. A child will be treated as the qualifying child of
his or her noncustodial parent if all of the follow-
ing apply.Adopted child. An adopted child is always
Residency Test
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 1. The parents:child” includes a child who was lawfully placed To meet this test, your child must have lived with
with you for legal adoption. you for more than half of the year. There are a. Are divorced or legally separated under
exceptions for temporary absences, children a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Eligible foster child.An eligible foster child iswho were born or died during the year, kid- nance,an individual who is placed with you by an au-napped children, and children of divorced orthorized placement agency or by judgment, de- b. Are separated under a written separa-separated parents.cree, or other order of any court of competent tion agreement, or
jurisdiction. Temporary absences. Your child is consid-
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6ered to have lived with you during periods of
months of the year.time when one of you, or both, are temporarily
absent due to special circumstances such as:Age Test
2. The child received over half of his or her
• Illness, support for the year from the parents.To meet this test, a child must be:
• Education, 3. The child is in the custody of one or both• Under age 19 at the end of the year,
parents for more than half of the year.• Business,• A full-time student under age 24 at the end
4. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-of the year, or • Vacation, or
nance or written separation agreement that• Permanently and totally disabled at any• Military service. applies to 2005 provides that the noncus-time during the year, regardless of age. todial parent can claim the child as a de-
pendent (and, in the case of a pre-1985Death or birth of child.A child who was born
agreement, the noncustodial parent pro-Example. Your son turned 19 on Decemberor died during the year is treated as having lived
vides at least $600 for the support of the10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu-with you all year if your home was the child’s
child during the year) or the custodial par-dent, he does not meet the age test because, athome the entire time he or she was alive during
ent signs a written declaration that he orthe end of the year, he was not under age 19. the year. The same is true if the child lived with
she will not claim the child as a dependentyou all year except for any required hospital stayFull-time student.A full-time student is a stu- for the year.following birth.dent who is enrolled for the number of hours or
courses the school considers to be full-time at-Child born alive.You may be able to claim Written declaration. The custodial parenttendance. an exemption for a child who was born alivemay use either Form 8332 or a similar statement
during the year, even if the child lived only for a(containing the information required by the form)Student defined.To qualify as a student,moment. State or local law must treat the childto make the written declaration to release theyour child must be, during some part of each ofas having been born alive. There must be proofexemption to the noncustodial parent.any 5 calendar months of the year: of a live birth shown by an official document,The exemption can be released for 1 year,
such as a birth certificate. The child must be1. A full-time student at a school that has a for a number of specified years (for example,
your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and allregular teaching staff, course of study, and alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-
the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-a regularly enrolled student body at the fied in the declaration.
pendent must be met.school, or
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.
Stillborn child.You cannot claim an ex-2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- The custodial parent is the parent with whom the
emption for a stillborn child.ing course given by a school described in child lived for the greater part of the year. The
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern- other parent is the noncustodial parent.Kidnapped child. You can treat your child asment agency. If the parents divorced or separated duringmeeting the residency test even if the child has
the year and the child lived with both parentsbeen kidnapped, but both of the following state-The 5 calendar months do not have to be con-
before the separation, the custodial parent is thements must be true.secutive.
one with whom the child lived for the greater part
School defined. A school can be an ele- 1. The child is presumed by law enforcementof the rest of the year.
mentary school, junior and senior high school,authorities to have been kidnapped by
college, university, or technical, trade, orsomeone who is not a member of your Example. Your child lived with you for 10
mechanical school. However, an on-the-job family or the child’s family. months of the year. The child lived with your
training course, correspondence school, or In- former spouse for the other 2 months. You are2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, theternet school does not count as a school. considered the custodial parent.child lived with you for more than half of
Vocational high school students. Stu- the part of the year before the date of theParents who never married.This special
dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-kidnapping. rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-
try as a part of a school’s regular course of plies to parents who never married.
classroom and practical training are considered
full-time students.
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jade is a qualifying child of both you and your September, your son lived with you. For the restSupport Test (To Be a Qualifying
of the year, your son lived with your husband.mother because she meets the relationship,Child)
Your son is a qualifying child of both you andage, residency, and support tests for both you
your husband because your son lived with eachand your mother. However, only one of you canTo meet this test, the child cannot have provided
of you for more than half the year and becauseclaim her. You agree to let your mother claimmore than half of his or her own support for the
he met the relationship, age, and support testsyear. Jade. This means she can claim Jade as a
for both of you. You and your husband are notThis test is different from the support test todependent and can claim her as a qualifying
divorced, legally separated, or separated underbe a qualifying relative, which is described later.child for the child tax credit, head of household
a written separation agreement, so the specialHowever, to see what is or is not support, seefiling status, credit for child and dependent care
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative), rule for divorced or separated parents does notexpenses, and the earned income credit, if she
later. If you are not sure whether a child provided apply.qualifies for each of those tax benefits.
more than half of his or her own support, you You and your husband will file separate re-
may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful. Example 2—two persons unable to agree. turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your
The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptson as a qualifying child. This means, if yourScholarships. A scholarship received by athat you and your mother are unable to agreehusband does not claim your son as a qualifyingchild who is a full-time student is not taken intoand both of you claim Jade as a dependent andchild, you can claim your son as a dependentaccount in determining whether the child pro-claim her as a qualifying child for the child taxand treat him as a qualifying child for the childvided more than half of his or her own support.
credit and earned income credit. You as thetax credit. However, you cannot claim head of
child’s parent will be the only one allowed tohousehold filing status because you and your
claim Jade as a dependent and claim her as a husband did not live apart the last 6 months ofSpecial Test for Qualifying Child of
the year. As a result, your filing status is marriedqualifying child for the child tax credit andMore Than One Person filing separately, so you cannot claim the earnedearned income credit. The IRS will disallow your
income credit or the credit for child and depen-mother’s claim to these tax benefits unless she
If your qualifying child is not a qualify- dent care expenses.has another qualifying child.
ing child for anyone else, this test
does not apply to you and you do not
TIP
Example 6—separated parents. The factsExample 3—qualifying children split be-
need to read about it. This is also true if your are the same as in Example 5 except that youtween two persons. The facts are the same
qualifying child is not a qualifying child for any- and your husband are unable to agree and bothas in Example 1 except that you also have twoone else except your spouse with whom you file of you claim your son as a qualifying child. Onlyother young children who are qualifying childrena joint return. your husband will be allowed to treat your son asof both you and your mother. Only one of you
a qualifying child. This is because, during 2005,can claim each child as a dependent. However,If a child is treated as the qualifying
the boy lived with him longer than with you. Ifyou and your mother can split the three qualify-child of the noncustodial parent under
you claimed an exemption, the child tax credit,ing children between you. For example, you canthe rules for children of divorced orCAUTION
!
head of household filing status, credit for childclaim one child as a dependent and your motherseparated parents described earlier, see Apply-
and dependent care expenses, or the earnedcan claim the other two.ing this special test to divorced or separated
income credit for your son, the IRS will disallowparents, later.
Example 4—taxpayer who is a qualifying your claim to all these tax benefits. In addition,Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 because you and your husband did not live apartage, residency, and support tests to be a qualify-
except that you are only 18 years old and did not the last 6 months of the year, your husbanding child of more than one person. Although the
provide more than half of your own support for cannot claim head of household filing status. Aschild is a qualifying child of each of these per-
the year. This means you are your mother’s a result, his filing status is married filing sepa-sons, only one person can actually treat the child
qualifying child and she could claim you as a rately, so he cannot claim the earned incomeas a qualifying child. To meet this special test,
dependent. Because of the Dependent Tax- credit or the credit for child and dependent careyou must be the person who can treat the child
payer Test explained earlier, you cannot treat expensesas a qualifying child.
your daughter as a qualifying child and cannotIf you and another person have the same
Example 7—unmarried parents. You,claim her as a dependent. Only your mother canqualifying child, you and the other person(s) can
your 5-year-old son, and your son’s father liveddecide which of you will treat the child as a treat your daughter as a qualifying child.
together all year. You and your son’s father arequalifying child. That person can take all of the
Example 5—separated parents. You, not married. Your son is a qualifying child of bothfollowing tax benefits (provided the person is
eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifying your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived you and his father because he meets the rela-
child. together until August 1, 2005, when your hus- tionship, age, residency, and support tests for
band moved out of the household. In August and both you and his father. Your adjusted gross• The exemption for the child.
• The child tax credit. Table 3-2.When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the
Same Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)• Head of household filing status.
Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent• The credit for child and dependent care
under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying thisexpenses.
special test to divorced or separated parents.• The earned income credit.
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated asThe other person cannot take any of these bene-
the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .fits based on this qualifying child. In other words,
you and the other person cannot agree to divideonly one of the persons is the child’s parent, parent.these tax benefits between you.
parent with whom the child livedIf you and the other person(s) cannot agree ontwo of the persons are parents of the child and they for the longer period of timewho will claim the child and more than onedo not file a joint return together, during the year.person files a return claiming the same child, the
IRS will disallow all but one of the claims using
two of the persons are parents of the child, they do
the tie-breaker rule in Table 3-2. not file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the highest adjusted
with each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).
Example 1—child lived with parent and the year,
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-
none of the persons are the child’s parent, person with the highest AGI.ter Jade lived with your mother all year. You are
25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income (AGI) is $8,000 and your son’s father’s Member of Household orQualifying RelativeAGI is $18,000. Your son’s father agrees to let Relationship Test
you treat the child as a qualifying child. ThisThere are four tests that must be met for a
To meet this test, a person must either:means you can claim him as a dependent andperson to be your qualifying relative. The four
treat him as a qualifying child for the child taxtests are: 1. Live with you all year as a member of yourcredit, head of household filing status, credit for household, orchild and dependent care expenses, and the1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listedearned income credit, if you qualify for each of2. Member of household or relationship test,under Relatives who do not have to livethose tax benefits.
with you.3. Gross income test, and
Example 8—unmarried parents. The If at any time during the year the person was4. Support test.facts are the same as in Example 7 except that your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify-
you and your son’s father are unable to agree ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-
and both of you claim your son as a qualifying tions, earlier.Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-child. Only your son’s father will be allowed toative can be any age. There is no age test for aRelatives who do not have to live with you.treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-qualifying relative. A person related to you in any of the followingcause his AGI, $18,000, is more than your AGI,
ways does not have to live with you all year as a$8,000. If you claimed an exemption, the child member of your household to meet this test.Kidnapped child. You can treat a child astax credit, head of household filing status, credit
your qualifying relative even if the child has beenfor child and dependent care expenses, or the • Your child, stepchild, eligible foster child,
kidnapped, but both of the following statementsor a descendant of any of them (for exam-earned income credit for your son, the IRS will
must be true. ple, your grandchild). (A legally adopteddisallow your claim to all these tax benefits.
child is considered your child.)
1. The child is presumed by law enforcementExample 9—child did not live with a par- • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-authorities to have been kidnapped byent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.someone who is not a member of yoursister’s child, lived with your mother all year. You
• Your father, mother, grandparent, or otherfamily or the child’s family.are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.mother’s AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify-2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, theing child of both you and your mother because • Your stepfather or stepmother.child met the tests to be your qualifyingshe meets the relationship, age, residency, andrelative for the part of the year before the• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.support tests for both you and your mother. date of the kidnapping. • A brother or sister of your father orHowever, only one of you can treat her as a
This treatment applies for all years until themother.qualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you
child is returned. However, the last year thistreat the child as a qualifying child. • Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law,treatment can apply is the earlier of: father-in-law, mother-in-law,
Example 10—child did not live with a par- brother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
1. The year there is a determination that theent. The facts are the same as in Example 9
Any of these relationships that were establishedchild is dead, orexcept that you and your mother are unable to
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce.agree and both of you claim your niece as a2. The year the child would have reachedqualifying child. Only your mother will be allowed Eligible foster child.An eligible foster childage 18.to treat your niece as a qualifying child. This is is an individual who is placed with you by an
authorized placement agency or by judgment,because your mother’s AGI, $15,000, is more
decree, or other order of any court of competentthan your AGI, $9,300. If you claimed an exemp-
Not a Qualifying Child Test jurisdiction.tion, the child tax credit, head of household filing
status, credit for child and dependent care ex-A child is not your qualifying relative if the child isJoint return.If you file a joint return, the per-penses, or the earned income credit for youryour qualifying child or the qualifying child ofson can be related to either you or your spouse.niece, the IRS will disallow your claim to all Also, the person does not need to be related toanyone else.these tax benefits. the spouse who provides support.
For example, your spouse’s uncle who re-Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, who
ceives more than half of his support from youApplying this special test to divorced or sep-is a student, lives with you and meets all the
may be your qualifying relative, even though hearated parents.If a child is treated as thetests to be your qualifying child. She is not your
does not live with you. However, if you and yourqualifying child of the noncustodial parent underqualifying relative.
spouse file separate returns, your spouse’s un-the rules for children of divorced or separated
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he livesExample 2. Your 2-year-old son lives withparents described earlier, the noncustodial par-
with you all year as a member of your house-your parents and meets all the tests to be theirent can claim an exemption and the child tax hold.qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-credit for the child but cannot claim the child as a
tive.qualifying child for head of household filing sta- Temporary absences. A person is consid-
tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex- ered to live with you as a member of your house-
Example 3. Your son lives with you but ispenses, or the earned income credit. If the child hold during periods of time when one of you, or
not your qualifying child because he is 30 yearsis the qualifying child of more than one other both, are temporarily absent due to special cir-
old and does not meet the age test. He may beperson, only one of those persons can claim the cumstances such as:
your qualifying relative if the gross income testchild as a qualifying child for head of household • Illness,and the support test are met.filing status, the credit for child and dependent
• Education,care expenses, and the earned income credit.
Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandsonNo other person can claim any of these three tax • Business,lived with his mother for 3 months, with his unclebenefits unless he or she has a different qualify-
• Vacation, orfor 4 months, and with you for 5 months duringing child. If you and any other person file a return
the year. He is not your qualifying child becauseclaiming the child as a qualifying child for any of • Military service.
he does not meet the residency test. He may bethese three tax benefits, the IRS will disallow all
your qualifying relative if the gross income testbut one of the claims using the tie-breaker rule in If the person is placed in a nursing home for
and the support test are met.Table 3-2. an indefinite period of time to receive constant
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
medical care, the absence may be consideredDisabled dependent working at shelteredare both considered provided by you in figuring
temporary. workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross whether you provide more than half of the sup-
income test), the gross income of an individual port. If your allotment is used to support persons
Death or birth.A person who died during thewho is permanently and totally disabled at any other than those you name, you can take the
year, but lived with you as a member of yourtime during the year does not include income for exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.
household until death, will meet this test. Theservices the individual performs at a sheltered
same is true for a child who was born during the Example. You are in the Armed Forces.workshop. The availability of medical care at the
year and lived with you as a member of your You authorize an allotment for your widowedworkshop must be the main reason for the
household for the rest of the year. The test is mother that she uses to support herself and herindividual’s presence there. Also, the income
also met if a child lived with you as a member of sister. If the allotment provides more than half ofmust come solely from activities at the workshop
your household except for any required hospital each person’s support, you can take an exemp-that are incident to this medical care.
stay following birth. tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify,A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
If your dependent died during the year and even though you authorize the allotment only for• Provides special instruction or training de-you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption your mother.signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances.vidual, andtion.
These allowances are treated the same way as• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-dependency allotments in figuring support. TheExample. Your dependent mother died on zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify-a political subdivision of a state or posses-ance for quarters are both considered as pro-ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp-sion, the United States, or the District ofvided by you for support.tion for a dependent were also met. You can Columbia.
claim an exemption for her on your return. Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person’s
total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-Local law violated.A person does not meet Support Test (To Be a Qualifying ings, and borrowed amounts used to supportthis test if at any time during the year the rela-Relative) that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-tionship between you and that person violates
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,local law. To meet this test, you generally must provide
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedmore than half of a person’s total support during
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as athe calendar year.
and tax-exempt interest.member of your household all year. However,However, if two or more persons provide
your relationship with her violated the laws of thesupport, but no one person provides more than
Example 1. You provide $4,000 towardstate where you live, because she was marriedhalf of a person’s total support, see Multiple
your mother’s support during the year. She hasto someone else. Therefore, she does not meetSupport Agreement, later.
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-this test and you cannot claim her as a depen-
How to determine if support test is met. curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-dent.
You figure whether you have provided moreest of $200. She uses all these for her support.
Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysthan half of a person’s total support by compar-You cannot claim an exemption for your mother
treated as your own child. The term “adopteding the amount you contributed to that person’sbecause the $4,000 you provide is not more
child” includes a child who was lawfully placedsupport with the entire amount of support thatthan half of her total support of $9,600.
with you for legal adoption. person received from all sources. This includes
support the person provided from his or her ownExample 2. Your brother’s daughter takesCousin. Your cousin meets this test only if hefunds. out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to payor she lives with you all year as a member ofYou may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur-her college tuition. She is personally responsibleyour household. A cousin is a descendant of aing whether you provided more than half of afor the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her totalbrother or sister of your father or mother.person’s support. support. You cannot claim an exemption for her
because you provide less than half of her sup-Person’s own funds not used for support.
port.A person’s own funds are not support unlessGross Income Test
they are actually spent for support. Social security benefits.If a husband and
To meet this test, a person’s gross income for wife each receive benefits that are paid by one
the year must be less than $3,200. Example. Your mother received $2,400 incheck made out to both of them, half of the total
social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shepaid is considered to be for the support of eachGross income defined.Gross income is allpaid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.spouse, unless they can show otherwise.income in the form of money, property, andShe put $300 in a savings account. If a child receives social security benefits andservices that is not exempt from tax. Even though your mother received a total ofuses them toward his or her own support, theIn a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-$2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-benefits are considered as provided by the child.ing business, gross income is the total net salesport. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella- Support provided by the state (welfare,port and no other support was received, youneous income from the business. food stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits pro-have provided more than half of her support.Gross receipts from rental property are gross vided by the state to a needy person generally
income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., toChild’s wages used for own support.You are considered support provided by the state.
determine the gross income from rental prop-cannot include in your contribution to yourHowever, payments based on the needs of the
erty. child’s support any support that is paid for by therecipient will not be considered as used entirely
Gross income includes a partner’s share ofchild with the child’s own wages, even if you paidfor that person’s support if it is shown that part of
the gross (not a share of the net) partnershipthe wages. the payments were not used for that purpose.
income. Year support is provided.The year you pro-Gross income also includes all unemploy- Foster care payments and expenses.Pay-vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifment compensation and certain scholarship and ments you receive for the support of a fosteryou do so with borrowed money that you repayfellowship grants. Scholarships received by de- child from a child placement agency are consid-in a later year.gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees, ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,If you use a fiscal year to report your income,supplies, books, and equipment required for payments you receive for the support of a fosteryou must provide more than half of theparticular courses may not be included in gross child from a state or county are considered sup-dependent’s support for the calendar year inincome. For more information about scholar- port provided by the state or county.which your fiscal year begins.ships, see chapter 12. If you are not in the trade or business of
Tax-exempt income, such as certain socialArmed Forces dependency allotments.The providing foster care and your unreimbursed
security benefits, is not included in gross in- part of the allotment contributed by the govern- out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster
come. ment and the part taken out of your military pay child were mainly to benefit an organization
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri- The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800 utilities. The house is completely furnished with
butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040 furniture belonging to your parents. You pay
ble contributions but are not considered support food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace’s $600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually
you provided. For more information about the $6,440 total support. included in rent for houses in the area where
deduction for charitable contributions, see chap- your parents live. Therefore, you consider the
Example 2. Your parents live with you, yourter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are not total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000
spouse, and your two children in a house youdeductible as charitable contributions, they are ($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished
own. The fair rental value of your parents’ shareconsidered support you provided. house, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each),If you are in the trade or business of provid- vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses of which you are considered to provide $4,200
ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,are not considered support provided by you. ($3,600 + $600).
which he spends equally between your motherPerson living in his or her own home.TheExample.  Lauren, an eligible foster child, and himself for items of support such as cloth-total fair rental value of a person’s home that helived with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 ing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalor she owns is considered support contributedmonths of the year. The Smiths cared for Lauren food expense for the household is $6,000. Yourby that person.because they wanted to adopt her (although she heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your
had not been placed with them for adoption). mother has hospital and medical expenses ofLiving with someone rent free.If you live
They did not care for her as a trade or business $600, which you pay during the year. Figure with a person rent free in his or her home, you
or to benefit the agency that placed her in their your parents’ total support as follows: must reduce the amount you provide for support
home. The Smiths’ unreimbursed expenses are by the fair rental value of lodging he or she
not deductible as charitable contributions but provides you.Support provided Father Motherare considered support they provided for
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000Property. Property provided as support isLauren.
measured by its fair market value. Fair marketPension spent for theirHome for the aged. If you make a lump-sum value is the price that property would sell for onsupport ............. 2,100 2,100advance payment to a home for the aged to take the open market. It is the price that would be
Share of food (1/6 ofcare of your relative for life and the payment is agreed upon between a willing buyer and a
$6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000based on that person’s life expectancy, the willing seller, with neither being required to act,
amount of support you provide each year is the and both having reasonable knowledge of theMedical expenses for
lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life relevant facts.mother.............. 6 0 0
expectancy. The amount of support you provide Capital expenses. Capital items, such asParents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700also includes any other amounts you provided furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtduring the year. You must apply the support test separatelyfor a person during the year can be included into each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000total support under certain circumstances.lodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-The following examples show when a capital
Total Support port of $4,100 – less than half. You provideitem is or is not support.$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000To figure if you provided more than half of afood, $600 medical) – more than half of her totalExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawnperson’s support, you must first determine thesupport of $4,700. You meet the support test formower for your 13-year-old child. The child istotal support provided for that person. Total sup-your mother, but not your father. Heat and utilitygiven the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.port includes amounts spent to provide food,costs are included in the fair rental value of theBecause the lawn mower benefits all memberslodging, clothing, education, medical and dentallodging, so these are not considered separately.of the household, you cannot include the cost ofcare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
the lawn mower in the support of your child.cessities. Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging,
Generally, the amount of an item of supportyou are considered to provide support equal to
Example 2. You buy a $150 television setis the amount of the expense incurred in provid-the fair rental value of the room, apartment,
as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supporthouse, or other shelter in which the person lives.
The television set is placed in your child’s bed-is the fair rental value of the lodging. Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow-
room. You can include the cost of the televisionExpenses that are not directly related to anyance for the use of furniture and appliances, and
set in the support of your child.one member of a household, such as the cost offor heat and other utilities that are provided.
food for the household, must be divided amongFair rental value defined.This is the Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andthe members of the household. amount you could reasonably expect to receiveregister it in your name. You and your
from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Maryused instead of actual expenses such as taxes,cause you own the car and do not give it to yourMiller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theirinterest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities,daughter but merely let her use it, you cannottwo children. Grace gets social security benefitscost of furniture and appliances, etc. In someinclude the cost of the car in your daughter’sof $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-cases, fair rental value may be equal to the renttotal support. However, you can include in yourportation, and recreation. Grace has no otherpaid. daughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensesincome. Frank and Mary’s total food expense forIf you provide the total lodging, the amount ofof operating the car for her benefit.the household is $5,200. They pay Grace’ssupport you provide is the fair rental value of themedical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairroom the person uses, or a share of the fairExample 4. Your 17-year-old son, usingrental value of the lodging provided for Grace isrental value of the entire dwelling if the personpersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similarhas use of your entire home. If you do not pro-vide all the rest of your son’s support – $4,000.rooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total supportvide the total lodging, the total fair rental valueSince the car is bought and owned by your son,as follows: must be divided depending on how much of thethe car’s fair market value ($4,500) must be
total lodging you provide. If you provide only aincluded in his support. Your son has providedFair rental value of lodging...... $  1,800 part and the person supplies the rest, the fairmore than half of his own total support of $8,500
rental value must be divided between both of($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifyingClothing, transportation and
you according to the amount each provides.child. You did not provide more than half of hisrecreation.................. 2,400
total support, so he is not your qualifying rela-Medical expenses............ 1,200 Example. Your parents live rent free in ative. You cannot claim an exemption for your
house you own. It has a fair rental value ofShare of food (1/5 of $5,200)..... 1,040 son.
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairTotal support............... $6,440 rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800Medical insurance premiums.Medical insur-
for the furniture. This does not include heat and ance premiums you pay, including premiums for
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3-1.Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year............................................ 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person’s support....................... 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes........................... 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person’s savings and other accounts at the end of the year....... 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.)............................. 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
6a. Enter the total rent paid.................................................. 6a.
6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home,
also include this amount in line 21............................................. 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses................................................. 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b).......... 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b).......................... 9.
10.Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance.................................. 10.
11.Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses....................... 11.
12.Enter total number of persons who lived in the household............................. 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13.Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person’s share of the household expenses.............. 13.
14.Enter the person’s total clothing expenses........................................ 14.
15.Enter the person’s total education expenses....................................... 15.
16.Enter the person’s total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . .16.
17.Enter the person’s total travel and recreation expenses............................... 17.
18.Enter the total of the person’s other expenses..................................... 18.
19.Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person’s support for the year............ 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20.Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50).................................................. 20.
21.Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support............... 21.
22.Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative.
Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23.Enter the amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . .23.
24.Add lines 21 and 23........................................................ 24.
25.Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person’s support........ 25.
26.Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for this
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement or the support test for children of divorced or separated
parents. See Multiple Support Agreement or Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents.
supplementary Medicare coverage, are in- Tuition payments and allowances under theprovide the rest of his support – $2,000. Be-
cluded in the support you provide. GI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under the cause GI benefits are included in total support,
GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while your son’s total support is $4,200 ($2,200 +Medical insurance benefits.Medical in- they attend school are included in total support. $2,000). You have not provided more than halfsurance benefits, including basic and supple- of his support.mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of Example. During the year, your son re-support. Child care expenses.If you pay someone toceives $2,200 from the government under the GI
provide child or dependent care, you can includeBill. He uses this amount for his education. You
these payments in the amount you provided for
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the support of your child or disabled dependent,Example 3. Your father lives with you andExample. Your child lived with you for 10
even if you claim a credit for the payments. For receives 25% of his support from social security,months of the year. The child lived with your
information on the credit, see chapter 32. 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-former spouse for the other 2 months. You are
cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or yourconsidered the custodial parent.Other support items. Other items may be uncle can take the exemption for your father ifconsidered as support depending on the facts inthe other signs a statement agreeing not to. Theeach case. Child support under pre-1985 agreement.one who takes the exemption must attach FormAll child support payments actually received2120, or a similar declaration, to his return and
from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985must keep for his records the signed statementDo Not Include agreement are considered used for the supportfrom the one agreeing not to take the exemption.
in Total Support of the child.
The following items are not included in total Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, theSupport Test for Children ofsupport. noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for theDivorced or Separated Parents child’s support. This amount is considered sup-1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifIn most cases, a child of divorced or separatedby persons from their own income. the $1,200 was actually spent on things otherparents will be a qualifying child of one of the
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid by than support.parents. See Children of divorced or separated
persons from their own income. parents under Qualifying Child, earlier. How- Alimony. Payments to a spouse that areever, if the child does not meet the requirements3. Life insurance premiums. includible in the spouse’s gross income as eitherto be a qualifying child of either parent, the childalimony, separate maintenance payments, or4. Funeral expenses. may be a qualifying relative of one of the par-similar payments from an estate or trust, are notents. In that case, the following rules must be5. Scholarships received by your child if your treated as a payment for the support of a depen-used in applying the support test.child is a full-time student. dent.A child will be treated as being the qualifying
6. Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educationalrelative of his or her noncustodial parent if all of
Assistance payments used for the supportthe following apply. Parents who never married.This special ruleof the child who receives them. for divorced or separated parents also applies to
1. The parents: parents who never married.
a. Are divorced or legally separated under
Multiple Support Agreement a decree of divorce or separate mainte-Multiple support agreement.If the support of
nance, the child is determined under a multiple supportSometimes no one provides more than half of
agreement, this special support test for divorcedthe support of a person. Instead, two or moreb. Are separated under a written separa-
or separated parents does not apply.persons, each of whom would be able to take tion agreement, or
the exemption but for the support test, togetherc. Lived apart at all times during the last 6provide more than half of the person’s support.months of the year.When this happens, you can agree that any
one of you who individually provides more than Phaseout of2. The child received over half of his or her10% of the person’s support, but only one, cansupport for the year from the parents.claim an exemption for that person as a qualify- Exemptionsing relative. Each of the others must sign a3. The child is in the custody of one or both
statement agreeing not to claim the exemptionparents for more than half of the year.The amount you can claim as a deduction forfor that year. The person who claims the exemp- exemptions is phased out once your adjusted4. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-tion must keep these signed statements for hisnance or written separation agreement thatgross income (AGI) goes above a certain levelor her records. A multiple support declarationapplies to 2005 provides that the noncus-for your filing status. These levels are as follows:identifying each of the others who agreed not totodial parent can claim the child as a de-claim the exemption must be attached to the AGI Levelpendent (and, in the case of a pre-1985return of the person claiming the exemption. Whichagreement, the noncustodial parent pro-Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can Reducesvides at least $600 for the support of thebe used for this purpose. Exemptionchild during the year) or the custodial par-
Filing Status Amountent signs a written declaration that he orExample 1. You, your sister, and your two she will not claim the child as a dependentbrothers provide the entire support of your Married filing separately...... $  109,475for the year.mother for the year. You provide 45%, your Single.................. 145,950
sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide Head of household..........  182,450
Written declaration. The custodial parent10%. Either you or your sister can claim an Married filing jointly......... 218,950
may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementexemption for your mother. The other must sign Qualifying widow(er)......... 218,950
(containing the information required by the form)a statement agreeing not to take an exemption
to make the written declaration to release theYou must reduce the dollar amount of yourfor your mother. The one who claims the exemp-
exemption to the noncustodial parent. exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part oftion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-
tion, to his or her return and must keep the The exemption can be released for 1 year,$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-
statement signed by the other for his or her for a number of specified years (for example,rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount
records. Because neither brother provides more alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-shown above for your filing status. If your AGI
than 10% of the support, neither can take the fied in the declaration. exceeds the amount shown by more than
exemption and neither has to sign a statement. $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.the amount of your deduction for exemptions is
The custodial parent is the parent with whom theExample 2. You and your brother each pro- reduced to zero.
child lived for the greater part of the year. Thevide 20% of your mother’s support for the year. If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingother parent is the noncustodial parent.The remaining 60% of her support is provided status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work-equally by two persons who are not related to If the parents divorced or separated duringsheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Formher. She does not live with them. Because more the year and the child lived with both parents1040A to figure the amount of your deduction forthan half of her support is provided by persons before the separation, the custodial parent is theexemptions.who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one one with whom the child lived for the greater part
can take the exemption. of the rest of the year.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Card, with the Social Security AdministrationTaxpayer identification numbers for
aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-(SSA). Information about applying for an SSNSocial Security resident alien who does not have and is notand Form SS-5 is available at your local SSA
eligible to get an SSN, your dependent mustoffice.Numbers for apply for an individual taxpayer identification It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) ofSSN. If you do not have a required SSN by theDependents line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Tofiling due date, you can file Form 4868 for anapply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application forYou must list the social security number (SSN)extension of time to file. IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number.of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-Born and died in 2005.  If your child wastion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or Taxpayer identification numbers forborn and died in 2005, and you do not have anForm 1040A. adoptees. If you have a child who was placedSSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thewith you by an authorized placement agency,If you do not list the dependent’s SSNchild’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enteryou may be able to claim an exemption for thewhen required or if you list an incor-“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Formchild. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anrect SSN, the exemption may be dis-CAUTION
!
1040 or Form 1040A.   ITIN for the child, you must get an adoptionallowed. taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.If your depen-No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application
dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, youclaim an exemption on your return does not for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending
must list the individual taxpayer identificationhave an SSN, either you or that person should U.S. Adoptions, for details.
number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing
tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
royalties. Estimated tax is used to pay notSalaries and Wagesonly income tax, but self-employment tax
and alternative minimum tax as well. Income tax is withheld from the pay of most4. employees. Your pay includes your regular pay,This chapter explains both of these methods.bonuses, commissions, and vacation al-In addition, it explains the following. lowances. It also includes reimbursements and
other expense allowances paid under a nonac-Tax Withholding • Credit for withholding and estimated tax.
countable plan. See Supplemental Wages,When you file your 2005 income tax re-
later, for more information about reimburse-turn, take credit for all the income tax with-and Estimated ments and allowances paid under a nonac-held from your salary, wages, pensions,
countable plan.etc., and for the estimated tax you paid for
If your income is low enough that you will not2005.Tax
have to pay income tax for the year, you may be• Underpayment penalty. If you did not payexempt from withholding. This is explainedenough tax during the year either throughunder Exemption From Withholding, later.withholding or by making estimated taxWhat’s New Military retirees.Military retirement pay ispayments, you may have to pay a penalty.
treated in the same manner as regular pay forThe IRS usually can figure this penalty forfor 2006 income tax withholding purposes, even though ityou. See Underpayment Penalty at the
is treated as a pension or annuity for other taxend of this chapter.Tax law changes for 2006.When you figure purposes.how much income tax you want withheld from
Household workers. If you are a householdyour pay and when you figure your estimatedUseful Items worker, you can ask your employer to withholdtax, consider tax law changes effective in 2006.You may want to see: income tax from your pay.See What’s New for 2006 in the front of this
Tax is withheld only if you want it withheldpublication, or get Publication 553, Highlights ofPublication and your employer agrees to withhold it. If you2005 Tax Changes.
do not have enough income tax withheld, you❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed
❏ 553 Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes later under Estimated Tax.
❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax Farmworkers. Income tax is generally with-Reminders Withholding? held from your cash wages for work on a farm
unless your employer both:Estimated tax safe harbor for higher incomeForm (and Instructions)taxpayers. If your adjusted gross income was • Pays you cash wages of less than $150
more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are married❏ W-4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance during the year, and
filing a separate return), you will have to depositCertificate • Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-the smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2006❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pensiontaling less than $2,500 during the year.or 110% of the tax shown on your 2005 return to or Annuity Paymentsavoid an estimated tax penalty.
You can ask your employer to withhold in-❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income Tax come tax from noncash wages and other wagesPayment of estimated tax by electronic Withholding From Sick Pay not subject to withholding. If your employer doesfunds withdrawal. You may be able to pay
❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request not agree to withhold tax, or if not enough isyour estimated tax by authorizing an automatic
withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, aswithdrawal from your checking or savings ac-❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individualsdiscussed later under Estimated Tax.count. For more information, see Payment by
❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax byElectronic Funds Withdrawal in chapter 2 of
Individuals, Estates, and TrustsPublication 505.
Determining Amount of Tax
Withheld Using Form W-4
The amount of income tax your employer with-Introduction holds from your regular pay depends on twoWithholdingThis chapter discusses how to pay your tax as things.
you earn or receive income during the year. InThis section discusses income tax withholding• The amount you earn.general, the federal income tax is a on these types of income:pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay as • The information you give your employer
• Salaries and wages,you go. on Form W-4.
• Tips,• Withholding. If you are an employee, Form W-4 includes three types of informationyour employer probably withholds income• Taxable fringe benefits, that your employer will use to figure your with-tax from your pay. Tax may also be with- holding.• Sick pay,held from certain other income, including
pensions, bonuses, commissions, and • Whether to withhold at the single rate or at• Pensions and annuities,gambling winnings. In each case, the the lower married rate.
• Gambling winnings,amount withheld is paid to the IRS in your • How many withholding allowances youname. • Unemployment compensation, and claim. (Each allowance reduces the
• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax amount withheld.)• Certain federal payments, such as socialthrough withholding, or do not pay enoughsecurity. • Whether you want an additional amounttax that way, you might have to pay esti- withheld.This section explains in detail the rules for with-mated tax. People who are in business for
holding tax from each of these types of income.themselves generally will have to pay their
tax this way. You may have to pay esti-This section also covers backup withholdingmated tax if you receive income such ason interest, dividends, and other payments.dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and
Page 34 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 37 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. You must specify a filing status and aTwo jobs. If you have income from two jobs at• You have more than one job at a time.
number of withholding allowances on Form W-4. the same time, complete only one set of Form• You have nonwage income, such as inter-You cannot specify only a dollar amount of with- W-4 worksheets. Then split your allowances be-est, dividends, alimony, unemploymentholding. tween the Forms W-4 for each job. You cannot compensation, or self-employment in-claim the same allowances with more than onecome.employer at the same time. You can claim all
• You will owe additional amounts with youryour allowances with one employer and noneNew Job
return, such as self-employment tax.with the other, or divide them any other way.
When you start a new job, you must fill out Form • Your withholding is based on obsoleteMarried individuals.If both you and yourW-4 and give it to your employer. Your employer Form W-4 information for a substantialspouse are employed and expect to file a jointshould have copies of the form. If you need to part of the year.return, figure your withholding allowances usingchange the information later, you must fill out a
your combined income, adjustments, deduc-new form.
tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one setIf you work only part of the year (for example, Cumulative wage method. If you change theof worksheets. You can divide your total al-you start working after the beginning of the number of your withholding allowances duringlowances any way, but you cannot claim anyear), too much tax may be withheld. You may the year, too much or too little tax may haveallowance that your spouse also claims.be able to avoid overwithholding if your em- been withheld for the period before you madeIf you and your spouse expect to file sepa-ployer agrees to use the part-year method. See the change. You may be able to compensate forrate returns, figure your allowances using sepa-Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publication this if your employer agrees to use the cumula-rate worksheets based on your own individual505 for more information. tive wage withholding method for the rest of theincome, adjustments, deductions, exemptions,year. You must ask in writing that your employerand credits. use this method.
Changing Your Withholding To be eligible, you must have been paid forAlternative method of figuring withholding
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-allowances. You do not have to use the FormEvents during the year may change your marital weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.W-4 worksheets if you use a more accuratestatus or the exemptions, adjustments, deduc-method of figuring the number of withholdingtions, or credits you expect to claim on yourallowances. See Alternative method of figuringreturn. When this happens, you may need to Publication 919withholding allowances under Completing Formgive your employer a new Form W-4 to changeW-4 and Worksheets in chapter 1 of Publicationyour withholding status or number of al- To make sure you are getting the right amount of505 for more information.lowances. tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help you
If the event changes your withholding status compare the total tax to be withheld during thePersonal Allowances Worksheet. Use the
or the number of allowances you are claiming, year with the tax you can expect to figure onPersonal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of
you must give your employer a new Form W-4 your return. It also will help you determine howForm W-4 to figure your withholding allowances
within 10 days after either of the following. much additional withholding, if any, is neededfor exemptions and any special allowances that
each payday to avoid owing tax when you fileapply.• Your divorce, if you have been claiming your return. If you do not have enough tax with-married status. Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet. held, you may have to pay estimated tax, asUse this worksheet if you plan to itemize your• Any event that decreases the number of explained under Estimated Tax, later.deductions or claim adjustments to your incomewithholding allowances you can claim.
and you want to reduce your withholding.
Fill out this worksheet to adjust the number ofGenerally, you can submit a new Form W-4 Rules Your Employeryour withholding allowances for deductions, ad-whenever you wish to change the number of Must Followjustments to income, and tax credits. The De-your withholding allowances for any other rea-
ductions and Adjustments Worksheet is on pageson. It may be helpful for you to know some of the2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publication 505withholding rules your employer must follow.Changing your withholding for 2007. If explains this worksheet. These rules can affect how to fill out your Formevents in 2006 will decrease the number of your W-4 and how to handle problems that may arise.Two-Earner/Two-Job Worksheet. You maywithholding allowances for 2007, you must give
need to complete this worksheet if you have twoyour employer a new Form W-4 by December 1, New Form W-4. When you start a new job,jobs or a working spouse. You can also add to2006. If the event occurs in December 2006, your employer should give you a Form W-4 to fillthe amount, if any, on line 8 of this worksheet,submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days. out. Your employer will use the information youany additional withholding necessary to covergive on the form to figure your withholding begin-any amount you expect to owe other than in-ning with your first payday.come tax, such as self-employment tax.Checking Your Withholding If you later fill out a new Form W-4, your
employer can put it into effect as soon as possi-After you have given your employer a Form W-4, ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is theyou can check to see whether the amount of taxGetting the Right Amount start of the first payroll period ending 30 or morewithheld from your pay is too little or too much.of Tax Withheld days after you turn it in.See Publication 919, later. If too much or too
little tax is being withheld, you should give your In most situations, the tax withheld from yourNo Form W-4. If you do not give your em-
employer a new Form W-4 to change your with- pay will be close to the tax you figure on yourployer a completed Form W-4, your employer
holding. return if you follow these two rules. must withhold at the highest rate, as if you were
single and claimed no allowances.• You accurately complete all the Form W-4Note. You cannot give your employer a pay-worksheets that apply to you. Repaying withheld tax.If you find you arement to cover withholding for past pay periods or
having too much tax withheld because you dida payment for estimated tax. • You give your employer a new Form W-4
not claim all the withholding allowances you arewhen changes occur.
entitled to, you should give your employer a newBut because the worksheets and withholdingForm W-4. Your employer cannot repay any ofCompleting Form W-4 methods do not account for all possible situa-the tax previously withheld.and Worksheets tions, you may not be getting the right amountHowever, if your employer has withheldwithheld. This is most likely to happen in theForm W-4 has worksheets to help you figure more than the correct amount of tax for the Formfollowing situations.how many withholding allowances you can W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill out
claim. The worksheets are for your own records.• You are married and both you and your a new Form W-4 to have your withholding low-
Do not give them to your employer. spouse work. ered to the correct amount. Your employer can
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 35

Page 38 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
repay the amount that was incorrectly withheld.Reimbursements or other expense al- See Giving your employer money for taxes in
If you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect lowances paid under an accountable plan that chapter 6.
the full amount actually withheld. are more than your proven expenses are treated
Allocated tips.Your employer should notas paid under a nonaccountable plan if you do
withhold income tax, social security tax, Medi-not return the excess payments within a reason-
care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-able period of time.
Exemption From Withholding
cated tips. Withholding is based only on yourFor more information about accountable and
If you claim exemption from withholding, your pay plus your reported tips. Your employernonaccountable expense allowance plans, see
employer will not withhold federal income tax should refund to you any incorrectly withheldReimbursements in chapter 26.
from your wages. The exemption applies only to tax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 6 for more
income tax, not to social security or Medicare information.
tax. PenaltiesYou can claim exemption from withholding Taxable Fringe Benefitsfor 2006 only if both the following situationsYou may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of
apply. the following apply. The value of certain fringe benefits you receive
from your employer is considered part of your• For 2005 you had a right to a refund of all• You make statements or claim withholding
pay. Your employer generally must withhold in-federal income tax withheld because you allowances on your Form W-4 that reduce
come tax on these benefits from your regularhad no tax liability. the amount of tax withheld.
pay.• For 2006 you expect a refund of all federal• You have no reasonable basis for those For information on fringe benefits, see Fringeincome tax withheld because you expect statements or allowances at the time youBenefits under Employee Compensation into have no tax liability. prepare your Form W-4. chapter 5.
Your employer can choose not to withholdThere is also a criminal penalty for willfullyStudent. If you are a student, you are not income tax on the value of your personal use ofsupplying false or fraudulent information on yourautomatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see an employer-provided car, truck, or other high-Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa-whether you must file a return. If you work only way motor vehicle. Your employer must notifytion that would increase the amount withheld.part time or only during the summer, you may you if this choice is made.The penalty upon conviction can be either a finequalify for exemption from withholding. For more information on withholding on tax-of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year,able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publicationor both.Age 65 or older or blind.If you are 65 or older 505.These penalties will apply if you deliberatelyor blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1
and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at-of Publication 505, under Exemption From With-
Sick Paytempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold-holding, to help you decide whether you can
ing of taxes. A simple error, an honest mistake,claim exemption from withholding. Do not use
Sick pay is a payment to you to replace yourwill not result in one of these penalties. Foreither worksheet if you will itemize deductions,
regular wages while you are temporarily absentexample, a person who has tried to figure theclaim exemptions for dependents, or claim tax
from work due to sickness or personal injury. Tonumber of withholding allowances correctly, butcredits on your 2006 return. See Itemizing de-
qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a planclaims seven when the proper number is six, willductions or claiming exemptions or credits in
to which your employer is a party.not be charged a W-4 penalty.Publication 505.
If you receive sick pay from your employer or
an agent of your employer, income tax must beClaiming exemption from withholding.To Tips withheld. An agent who does not pay regularclaim exemption, you must give your employer a
wages to you may choose to withhold incomeForm W-4. Enter “exempt” on line 7. The tips you receive while working on your jobtax at a flat rate.If you claim exemption, but later your situa-are considered part of your pay. You must in-tion changes so that you will have to pay income However, if you receive sick pay from a thirdclude your tips on your tax return on the sametax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 within party who is not acting as an agent of yourline as your regular pay. However, tax is not10 days after the change. If you claim exemption employer, income tax will be withheld only if youwithheld directly from tip income, as it is fromin 2006, but you expect to owe income tax for choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S,your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer2007, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem- later.will take into account the tips you report whenber 1, 2006. If you receive payments under a plan infiguring how much to withhold from your regularYour claim of exempt status may be re- which your employer does not participate (suchpay.viewed by the IRS. as an accident or health plan where you paid allSee chapter 6 for information on reportingthe premiums), the payments are not sick payAn exemption is good for only 1 year. your tips to your employer. For more informationand usually are not taxable.You must give your employer a new Form W-4on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-
by February 15 each year to continue your ex-lication 531, Reporting Tip Income. Union agreements. If you receive sick payemption. under a collective bargaining agreement be-How employer figures amount to withhold. tween your union and your employer, the agree-The tips you report to your employer are countedment may determine the amount of income taxSupplemental Wages as part of your income for the month you reportwithholding. See your union representative orthem. Your employer can figure your withholdingyour employer for more information.Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis-in either of two ways.
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer- Form W-4S. If you choose to have income tax• By withholding at the regular rate on thetain sick pay, and expense allowances under withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, suchsum of your pay plus your reported tips.certain plans. The payer can figure withholding as an insurance company, you must fill out Formon supplemental wages using the same method• By withholding at the regular rate on yourW-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet youused for your regular wages. If these paymentspay plus a percentage of your reportedcan use to figure the amount you want withheld.are identified separately from your regular tips. They also explain restrictions that may apply.wages, your employer or other payer of supple-
Give the completed form to the payer of yourmental wages can withhold income tax from
sick pay. The payer must withhold according toNot enough pay to cover taxes.If your regu-these wages at a flat rate.
your directions on the form.lar pay is not enough for your employer to with-
If you do not request withholding on FormExpense allowances. Reimbursements or hold all the tax (including income tax, social
W-4S, or if you do not have enough tax withheld,other expense allowances paid by your em- security tax, Medicare tax, or railroad retirement
you may have to make estimated tax payments.ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated tax) due on your pay plus your tips, you can give
If you do not pay enough estimated tax or haveas supplemental wages. your employer money to cover the shortage.
Page 36 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 39 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
enough income tax withheld, you may have to ceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win- tion return shows how much you were paid dur-
pay a penalty. nings, showing the amount you won and the ing the year. It also includes your name and
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on linetaxpayer identification number (TIN). TINs are
64 of Form 1040. explained in chapter 1.Pensions and Annuities
These payments generally are not subject to
Income tax usually will be withheld from yourUnemployment withholding. However, “backup” withholding ispension or annuity distributions unless you required in certain situations. Backup withhold-Compensationchoose not to have it withheld. This rule applies ing can apply to most kinds of payments that areto distributions from: You can choose to have income tax withheldreported on Form 1099.
from unemployment compensation. To make The payer must withhold at a flat rate in the• A traditional individual retirement arrange-this choice, you will have to fill out Form W-4Vment (IRA), following situations.(or a similar form provided by the payer) and
• A life insurance company under an en-give it to the payer. • You do not give the payer your TIN in thedowment, annuity, or life insurance con- required manner.Unemployment compensation is taxable. So,tract,
if you do not have income tax withheld, you may• The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Tax, you gave is incorrect.
later.• A stock bonus plan, and • You are required, but fail, to certify that
If you do not pay enough tax either through• Any other plan that defers the time you you are not subject to backup withholding.
withholding or estimated tax, you may have toreceive compensation. • The IRS notifies the payer to start with-pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,
holding on interest or dividends becauselater, for information.The amount withheld depends on whether
you have underreported interest or divi-you receive payments spread out over more
dends on your income tax return. The IRSthan 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 yearFederal Payments will do this only after it has mailed you four(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo-
ver distribution (ERD). You cannot choose not to notices over at least a 210-day period.You can choose to have income tax withheld
have income tax withheld from an ERD. from certain federal payments you receive.
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-These payments are:
cation 505 for more information.More information. For more information on
taxation of annuities and distributions (including1. Social security benefits,
eligible rollover distributions) from qualified re- Penalties.There are civil and criminal penal-2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,tirement plans, see chapter 10. For information ties for giving false information to avoid backup
on IRAs, see chapter 17. For more information3. Commodity credit loans you choose to in-withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-
on withholding on pensions and annuities, in-clude in your gross income, and nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up tocluding a discussion of Form W-4P, see Pen- $1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.4. Payments under the Agricultural Act ofsions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Publication
1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II of505.
the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, as
amended, that are treated as insurance
Gambling Winnings proceeds and that you receive because:Estimated Tax
Income tax is withheld from certain kinds ofa. Your crops were destroyed or damaged
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax ongambling winnings at a flat rate. by drought, flood, or any other natural
income that is not subject to withholding. Thisdisaster, orGambling winnings of more than $5,000 from includes income from self-employment, interest,the following sources are subject to income taxb. You were unable to plant crops be-dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale ofwithholding. cause of a natural disaster described inassets, prizes, and awards. You also may have(a). to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax• Any sweepstakes, wagering pool, or lot-
being withheld from your salary, pension, ortery. To make this choice, you will have to fill out
other income is not enough.Form W-4V (or a similar form provided by the• Any other wager, if the proceeds are at
payer) and give it to the payer. Estimated tax is used to pay both income taxleast 300 times the amount of the bet.
and self-employment tax, as well as other taxesIf you do not choose to have income taxIt does not matter whether your winnings are and amounts reported on your tax return. If youwithheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win- do not pay enough through withholding or esti-See Estimated Tax, later.nings not paid in cash are taken into account at
mated tax payments, you may have to pay atheir fair market value. If you do not pay enough tax either throughpenalty. If you do not pay enough by the due
Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slotwithholding or estimated tax, you may have todate of each payment period (see When To Paymachines generally are not subject to incomepay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty, Estimated Tax, later), you may be charged atax withholding. However, you may need to pro-later, for information. penalty even if you are due a refund when youvide the payer with a social security number to file your tax return. For information on when theavoid withholding. See Backup withholding on
More information. For more information penalty applies, see Underpayment Penalty,gambling winnings in Publication 505. If you
about the tax treatment of social security andlater.receive gambling winnings not subject to with-
railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Getholding, you may need to pay estimated tax. See
Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, for infor-Estimated Tax, later. Who Does Not Have Tomation about the tax treatment of commodity
If you do not pay enough tax through with-credit loans or crop disaster payments. Pay Estimated Taxholding or estimated tax payments, you may
have to pay a penalty. See Underpayment Pen- If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoidBackup Withholdingalty, later. having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-
ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. ToBanks and other businesses that pay you cer-
do this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer.Form W-2G. If a payer withholds income tax tain kinds of income must file an information
See chapter 1 of Publication 505.from your gambling winnings, you should re- return (Form 1099) with the IRS. The informa-
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 37

Page 40 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2006 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2005 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (66-2/3% for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2006 tax
return? Note: Your 2005 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
* 110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2005 and 2006 is from farming or fishing and your 2005 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2006 is married filing a separate return).
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
Estimated tax not required.You do not have ure 4-A and chapter 2 of Publication 505 for2005 joint return and 2006 separate re-
to pay estimated tax for 2006 if you meet all more information. turns. If you plan to file a separate return for
three of the following conditions. 2006, but you filed a joint return for 2005, yourAliens. Resident and nonresident aliens2005 tax is your share of the tax on the joint• You had no tax liability for 2005. may also have to pay estimated tax. Residentreturn. You file a separate return if you file asaliens should follow the rules in this chapter• You were a U.S. citizen or resident for the single, head of household, or married filing sep-unless noted otherwise. Nonresident alienswhole year. arately.should get Form 1040-ES(NR), U.S. EstimatedTo figure your share of the tax on the joint• Your 2005 tax year covered a 12-monthTax for Nonresident Alien Individuals. return, first figure the tax both you and yourperiod. Married taxpayers. To figure whether you spouse would have paid had you filed separate
must pay estimated tax, apply the rules dis-returns for 2005 using the same filing status asYou had no tax liability for 2005 if your total taxcussed here to your separate estimated income.for 2006. Then multiply the tax on the joint returnwas zero or you did not have to file an incomeIf you can make joint estimated tax payments,by the following fraction.tax return. you can apply these rules on a joint basis.
The tax you would have paidYou and your spouse can make joint esti-
had you filed a separate returnWho Must Pay mated tax payments even if you are not living
together. The total tax you and yourEstimated Tax? You and your spouse cannot make joint esti- spouse would have paid had
mated tax payments if: you filed separate returnsIf you had a tax liability for 2005, you may have
to pay estimated tax for 2006.
• You are legally separated under a decree
Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re-of divorce or separate maintenance,General rule.You must pay estimated tax for
turn for 2005 showing taxable income of2006 if both of the following apply. • You and your spouse have different tax$48,500 and a tax of $6,549. Of the $48,500years, or taxable income, $40,100 was Joe’s and the rest1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in tax
was Heather’s. For 2006, they plan to file mar-• Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-for 2006 after subtracting your withholding
ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of theless you elected to be treated as a resi-and credits.
tax on the 2005 joint return as follows.dent alien (see chapter 1 of Publication2. You expect your withholding and credits to519)).be less than the smaller of: Tax on $40,100 based on a separate
return..................... $6,696Whether you and your spouse make joint esti-a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your Tax on $8,400 based on a separatemated tax payments or separate payments will2006 tax return, or return.....................  8 9 9not affect your choice of filing a joint tax return or
Total...................... $  7,595b. 100% of the tax shown on your 2005separate returns for 2006.
tax return. Your 2005 tax return must Joe’s percentage of total ($6,696 ÷2005 separate returns and 2006 jointcover all 12 months. $7,595).................... 8 8 %return. If you plan to file a joint return with yourJoe’s share of tax on joint returnspouse for 2006, but you filed separate returns($6,549 × 88%) .............. $  5,763Special rules for farmers, fishermen, andfor 2005, your 2005 tax is the total of the tax
higher income taxpayers.There are excep- shown on your separate returns. You filed a
tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen,separate return if you filed as single, head of
and certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig-household, or married filing separately.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 41 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the regular installment method or the annualizedWhen To StartHow To Figure income installment method. These methods are
You do not have to make estimated tax pay-Estimated Tax described in Publication 505. If you do not pay
ments until you have income on which you willenough each payment period, you may beTo figure your estimated tax, you must figureowe the tax. If you have income subject to esti-charged a penalty even if you are due a refundyour expected adjusted gross income, taxablemated tax during the first payment period, youwhen you file your tax return.income, taxes, deductions, and credits for the must make your first payment by the due date
Underpayment penalty. If your estimatedfor the first payment period. You can pay all youryear.
tax payment for a previous period is less thanestimated tax at that time, or you can pay it inWhen figuring your 2006 estimated tax, it
installments. If you choose to pay in install-one-fourth of your amended estimated tax, youmay be helpful to use your income, deductions,
ments, make your first payment by the due datemay be charged a penalty for underpayment ofand credits for 2005 as a starting point. Use your
for the first payment period. Make your remain-estimated tax for that period when you file your2005 federal tax return as a guide. You can useing installment payments by the due dates fortax return. See chapter 4 of Publication 505 forForm 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax.the later periods. more information.You must make adjustments both for
changes in your own situation and for recentNo income subject to estimated tax during
changes in the tax law. For 2006, there arefirst period.If you do not have income subjectChange in estimated tax.After you make an
to estimated tax until a later payment period, youseveral changes in the law. Some of these estimated tax payment, changes in your income,
can make your first payment by the due date forchanges are discussed in Publication 553, High- adjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptionsthat period. You can pay your entire estimatedlights of 2005 Tax Changes, or visit the IRS may make it necessary for you to refigure yourtax by the due date for that period, or you canwebsite at www.irs.gov. estimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of yourpay it in installments by the due date for thatForm 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help amended estimated tax by the next paymentperiod and the due dates for the remaining peri-you figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- due date after the change or in installments byods. The following chart shows when to makesheet for your records. that date and the due dates for the remaininginstallment payments.For more complete information and exam- payment periods.
ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2006,If you first
see chapter 2 of Publication 505. have income
on which you Make a Make later Estimated Tax Payments
must pay payment installments Not RequiredWhen To Pay estimated tax: by: by:
Estimated Tax You do not have to pay estimated tax if your
withholding in each payment period is at least asBefore Apr. 1  Apr. 15  June 15For estimated tax purposes, the year is divided much as:Sept. 15into four payment periods. Each period has a Jan. 15 nextspecific payment due date. If you do not pay • One-fourth of your required annual pay-year*enough tax by the due date of each of the pay- ment, or
ment periods, you may be charged a penalty
• Your required annualized income install-even if you are due a refund when you file your
ment for that period.After Mar. 31 June 15  Sept. 15income tax return. The following chart gives the
and Jan. 15 nextpayment periods and due dates for estimated You also do not have to pay estimated tax if youbefore June 1 year*tax payments. will pay enough through withholding to keep the
amount you owe with your return under $1,000.For the period: Due date:
After May 31  Sept. 15  Jan. 15 next How To Pay Estimated Taxand year*Jan. 1* through Mar. 31  Apr. 15
before Sept. 1 There are five ways to pay estimated tax.April 1 through May 31  June 15
• By crediting an overpayment on your 2005June 1 through Aug. 31  Sept. 15
return to your 2006 estimated tax.After Aug. 31  Jan. 15  (None)Sept. 1 through Dec. 31  Jan. 15 next year* • By sending in your payment with a pay-next year**
ment voucher from Form 1040-ES.
*See January payment, and Saturday, • By using the Electronic Federal Tax Pay-*If your tax year does not begin on January 1,Sunday, holiday rule under When To Paysee the Form 1040-ES instructions. ment System (EFTPS). For EFTPS infor-Estimated Tax, earlier.**See January payment, later. mation, see chapter 1.
How much to pay to avoid a penalty. To • By electronic funds withdrawal if you are
determine how much you should pay by eachSaturday, Sunday, holiday rule.If the due filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A electroni-
payment due date, see How To Figure Eachdate for an estimated tax payment falls on a cally.
Payment, next. If the earlier discussion of NoSaturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment • By credit card using a pay-by-phone sys-income subject to estimated tax during first pe-will be on time if you make it on the next day that tem or the Internet.riod or the later discussion of Change in esti-is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. For
mated tax applies to you, you may need to readexample, a payment due Monday, January 15,
Annualized Income Installment Method in chap-2007, will be on time if you make it by Tuesday, Crediting an Overpaymentter 2 of Publication 505 for information on how toJanuary 16, 2007. January 15 is a legal holiday.avoid a penalty. When you file your Form 1040 or Form 1040A
for 2005 and you have an overpayment of tax,January payment. If you file your 2006 Form
you can apply part or all of it to your estimatedHow To Figure1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2007, and
tax for 2006. On line 74 of Form 1040, or line 46pay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not needEach Payment of Form 1040A, enter the amount you wantto make the payment due on January 16, 2007.
credited to your estimated tax rather than re-You should pay enough estimated tax by the
funded. The amount you have credited shouldFiscal year taxpayers.If your tax year doesdue date of each payment period to avoid a
not start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ES be taken into account when figuring your esti-penalty for that period. You can figure your re-
instructions for your payment due dates. mated tax payments.quired payment for each period by using either
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Page 42 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The credit will be applied to your payments in Form W-2 is also used to report any taxable sick
pay you received and any income tax withheldthe order necessary to avoid the penalty forCredit for Withholdingfrom your sick pay.underpayment of estimated tax. You cannot
have any of that amount refunded to you untiland Estimated Taxthe close of that tax year. You also cannot use Form W-2G
that overpayment in any other way. When you file your 2005 income tax return, takeIf you had gambling winnings in 2005, the payercredit for all the income tax and excess socialmay have withheld income tax. If tax was with-security or railroad retirement tax withheld fromheld, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show-Using the Payment Vouchers your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, takeing the amount you won and the amount of tax
credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2005.withheld.Each payment of estimated tax must be accom-These credits are subtracted from your tax. Youpanied by a payment voucher from Form Report the amounts you won on line 21 ofshould file a return and claim these credits, evenForm 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld on1040-ES. If you made estimated tax paymentsif you do not owe tax. line 64 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-last year, you should receive a copy of the 2006
If you had two or more employers and werenings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot useForm 1040-ES in the mail. It will have payment
paid wages of more than $90,000 during 2005,Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.vouchers preprinted with your name, address,
too much social security or railroad retirementand social security number. Using the preprinted
tax may have been withheld from your wages.vouchers will speed processing, reduce the
See Credit for Excess Social Security Tax orThe 1099 Serieschance of error, and help save processing costs.
Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld in chapter 37.If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you Most forms in the 1099 series are not filed with
will have to get Form 1040-ES. After you make your return. You should be sent these forms byWithholdingyour first payment, a Form 1040-ES package January 31, 2006. Keep these forms for your
with the preprinted vouchers will be mailed to records. There are several different forms in thisIf you had income tax withheld during 2005, youyou. Follow the instructions in the package to series, including:should be sent a statement by January 31, 2006,make sure you use the vouchers correctly.showing your income and the tax withheld. De-• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker andUse the window envelopes that came withpending on the source of your income, you willBarter Exchange Transactions,your Form 1040-ES package. If you use yourreceive: • Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu-own envelope, make sure you mail your pay-
tions,• Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,ment vouchers to the address shown in the
Form 1040-ES instructions for the place where • Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-• Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,
you live. ments,or
Do not use the address shown in the • Form 1099-INT, Interest Income,• A form in the 1099 series.
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruc-
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income,tions.CAUTION
!
Forms W-2 and W-2G. You file Form W-2 with• Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount,If you file a joint return and you are makingyour income tax return. File Form W-2G with
joint estimated tax payments, please enter the • Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-your return if it shows any federal income tax
names and social security numbers on the pay- sions, Annuities, Retirement orwithheld from your winnings.
ment voucher in the same order as they will Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, InsuranceYou should get at least two copies of eachappear on the joint return. Contracts, etc.,form you receive. Attach one copy to the front of
your federal income tax return. Keep one copy• Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit
for your records. You should also receive copiesChange of address. You must notify the IRS Statement, and
to file with your state and local returns.if you are making estimated tax payments and • Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail-you changed your address during the year. You road Retirement Board.must send a clear and concise written statement
Form W-2to the IRS Service Center where you filed your If you received the types of income reportedlast return and provide all of the following: on some forms in the 1099 series, you may notYour employer should send you a Form W-2 for
be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.2005 by January 31, 2006. You should receive a• Your full name (and spouse’s full name), See the instructions to these forms for details.separate Form W-2 from each employer you
• Your signature (and spouse’s signature),worked for.
Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to yourIf you stopped working before the end of the• Your old address (and spouse’s old ad- return if box 4 shows federal income tax with-year, your employer could have given you yourdress if different), held. Include the amount withheld in the total onForm W-2 at any time after you stopped working.line 64 of Form 1040 or line 39 of Form 1040A.• Your new address, and However, your employer must send it to you byYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receivedJanuary 31, 2006.• Your social security number (and spouse’s payments reported on Form 1099-R.social security number). If you ask for the form, your employer must
send it to you within 30 days after receiving yourBackup withholding. If you were subject toYou can use Form 8822, Change of Address, forwritten request or within 30 days after your finalbackup withholding on income you received dur-this purpose. wage payment, whichever is later. ing 2005, include the amount withheld, asYou can continue to use your old preprintedIf you have not received your Form W-2 onshown on your Form 1099, in the total on line 64
payment vouchers until the IRS sends you newtime, you should ask your employer for it. If youof Form 1040, line 39 of Form 1040A, or line 7 of
ones. However, do not correct the address ondo not receive it by February 15, call the IRS.Form 1040EZ.
the old voucher. Form W-2 shows your total pay and other
compensation and the income tax, social secur-
Form Not Correctity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-Payment by Electronic Funds ing the year. Include the federal income tax
If you receive a form with incorrect informationWithdrawal or Credit Card withheld (as shown on Form W-2) on:
on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected
If you want to make estimated payments by • Line 64 if you file Form 1040, form. Call the telephone number or write to the
electronic funds withdrawal or by credit card, address given for the payer on the form. The• Line 39 if you file Form 1040A, orsee the Form 1040-ES instructions or How To corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive
Pay Estimated Tax in Publication 505. • Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ. will be marked “Corrected.” A special form, Form
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 43 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
W-2c, Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, isName changed. If you changed your name,
used to correct a Form W-2. and you made estimated tax payments using Underpayment Penaltyyour old name, attach a brief statement to the
front of your tax return indicating: If you did not pay enough tax either through
Form Received After Filing withholding or by making estimated tax pay-• When you made the payments,
ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-If you file your return and you later receive a• The amount of each payment, mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.form for income that you did not include on your Generally, you will not have to pay a penalty for• The IRS address to which you sent thereturn, you should report the income and take 2005 if any of the following situations applies.payments,credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form
1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax • The total of your withholding and esti-• Your name when you made the payments,
Return. mated tax payments was at least as muchand
as your 2004 tax (or 110% of your 2004• Your social security number. tax if your adjusted gross income was
more than $150,000, $75,000 if your 2005Separate Returns The statement should cover payments you
filing status is married filing separately)made jointly with your spouse as well as any you
If you are married but file a separate return, you and you paid all required estimated taxmade separately.
can take credit only for the tax withheld from payments on time.
your own income. Do not include any amountSeparate Returns • The tax balance due on your return is nowithheld from your spouse’s income. However,
more than 10% of your total 2005 tax, anddifferent rules may apply if you live in a commu-If you and your spouse made separate esti- you paid all required estimated tax pay-nity property state. mated tax payments for 2005 and you file sepa-ments on time.Community property states are listed inrate returns, you can take credit only for your
chapter 2. For more information on these rules, • Your total 2005 tax minus your withholdingown payments.
and some exceptions, see Publication 555, is less than $1,000.If you made joint estimated tax payments,
Community Property. you must decide how to divide the payments • You did not have a tax liability for 2004.between your returns. One of you can claim all
• You did not have any withholding taxesof the estimated tax paid and the other none, or
Fiscal Years and your current year tax less any house-you can divide it in any other way you agree on.
hold employment taxes is less thanIf you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal $1,000.ments in proportion to each spouse’s individualyear (a 12-month period ending on the last daytax as shown on your separate returns for 2005.Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-of any month except December), you must fol-
man. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4low special rules to determine your credit for
of Publication 505 for more information.federal income tax withholding. For a discussionDivorced Taxpayersof how to take credit for withholding on a fiscal
IRS can figure the penalty for you.If youyear return, see Fiscal Years in chapter 3 ofIf you made joint estimated tax payments forthink you owe the penalty but you do not want toPublication 505. 2005, and you were divorced during the year,figure it yourself when you file your tax return,either you or your former spouse can claim all ofyou may not have to. Generally, the IRS willthe joint payments, or you each can claim part ofEstimated Tax figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.them. If you cannot agree on how to divide theHowever, you must complete Form 2210 andpayments, you must divide them in proportion toTake credit for all your estimated tax payments attach it to your return if you think you are able toeach spouse’s individual tax as shown on yourfor 2005 on line 65 of Form 1040 or line 40 of lower or eliminate your penalty. See chapter 4 ofseparate returns for 2005.Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from Publication 505.If you claim any of the joint payments on your2004 that you had credited to your 2005 esti-
tax return, enter your former spouse’s socialmated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form
security number (SSN) in the space provided on1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot use
the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youForm 1040EZ.
divorced and remarried in 2005, enter your pres-
ent spouse’s SSN in that space and write your
former spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV,” to the
left of line 65, Form 1040, or line 40, Form
1040A.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explain whichIncome income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and losses
you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling your home.
Advance commissions and other earnings.• Bonuses and awards, If you receive advance commissions or other
• Special rules for certain employees, andamounts for services to be performed in the
5. future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you• Sickness and injury benefits. must include these amounts in your income in
the year you receive them.The chapter explains what income is included
If you repay unearned commissions or otherin the employee’s gross income and what is notWages, Salaries, amounts in the same year you receive them,included.
reduce the amount included in your income by
the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxand Other Useful Items year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-You may want to see: ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),
Earnings or you may be able to take a credit for that year.Publication See  Repayments in chapter 12.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-ExpensesWhat’s New ceive travel, transportation, or other business
❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care expense allowances or reimbursements from
ExpensesElective deferrals.The limit on the amount of your employer, see Publication 463. If you are
your wages you can elect to defer into certain reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxretirement plans (such as section 401(k) plans) tion 521, Moving Expenses.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomeincreases each year through 2006. If you are
age 50 or older, you may be able to make addi- Back pay awards. Include in income amounts
tional catch-up elective deferrals. See Elective you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
deferrals in Retirement Plan Contributions back pay. These include payments made to you
under Employee Compensation. for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,Employee and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. should be reported to you by your employer onThis Act provides tax relief for persons affectedCompensation Form W-2.by Hurricane Katrina. Under this Act, you may
be able to exclude from income amounts youThis section discusses various types of em-Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsreceive as mileage reimbursements from a qual-ployee compensation including fringe benefits,you receive for outstanding work are included inified charitable organization. See Publicationretirement plan contributions, stock options, andyour income and should be shown on your Form4492. restricted property. W-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips
for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youForm W-2. If you are an employee, you shouldreceive is goods or services, you must includereceive Form W-2 from your employer showingthe fair market value of the goods or services inthe pay you received for your services. Includeyour income. However, if your employer merelyReminder your pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A,promises to pay you a bonus or award at someor on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do notfuture time, it is not taxable until you receive it orForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen orreceive a Form W-2. it is made available to you.resident alien, you must report income from
Child care providers.If you provide child-sources outside the United States (foreign in- Employee achievement award. If you re-care, either in the child’s home or in your homecome) on your tax return unless it is exempt by ceive tangible personal property (other thanor other place of business, the pay you receiveU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asmust be included in your income. If you are notor outside the United States and whether or not an award for length of service or safety achieve-an employee, you are probably self-employedyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- ment, you generally can exclude its value fromand must include payments for your services onment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This your income. However, the amount you can ex-Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss Fromapplies to earned income (such as wages and clude is limited to your employer’s cost andBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Nettips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsProfit From Business. You generally are not anest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchemployee unless you are subject to the will andand royalties). awards you receive during the year. Your em-control of the person who employs you as toIf you reside outside the United States, you ployer can tell you whether your award is awhat you are to do and how you are to do it.may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign qualified plan award. Your employer must make
source earned income. For details, see Publica-Baby-sitting.If you baby-sit for relatives or the award as part of a meaningful presentation,
tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-neighborhood children, whether on a regular under conditions and circumstances that do not
dent Aliens Abroad. basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
providers apply to you. guised pay.
However, the exclusion does not apply to the
following awards.MiscellaneousIntroduction • A length-of-service award if you received itCompensation
This chapter discusses compensation received for less than 5 years of service or if you
for services as an employee, such as wages, This section discusses different types of em- received another length-of-service award
salaries, and fringe benefits. The topics include: ployee compensation. during the year or the previous 4 years.
Page 42 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 45 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A safety achievement award if you are aSeverance pay. Amounts you receive as sev- granted. You include the cash payment in your
manager, administrator, clerical employee, erance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentincome in the year you use the right.
or other professional employee or if more for cancellation of your employment contract
than 10% of eligible employees previously must be included in your income in the tax yearFringe Benefitsreceived safety achievement awards dur- you receive it.
ing the year. Fringe benefits received in connection with theAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-
performance of your services are included ineral employee and receive a lump-sum payment
your income as compensation unless you payExample. Ben Green received three em- for accrued annual leave when you retire or
fair market value for them or they are specificallyployee achievement awards during the year: aresign, this amount will be included as wages on
excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atyour Form W-2.
ance of services (for example, under a covenant$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoIf you resign from one agency and are reem-
not to compete) is treated as the performance ofvalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atployed by another agency, you may have to
services for purposes of these rules.$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachment to the second agency. You can reduce
award by itself would be excluded from income. Accounting period. You must use the samegross wages by the amount you repaid in the
However, because the $1,750 total value of the accounting period your employer uses to reportsame tax year in which you received it. Attach to
awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
$150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income. ployer has the option to report taxable noncashgiven to you by the agency you repaid to explain
fringe benefits by using either of the followingthe difference between the wages on the return
Government cost-of-living allowances. rules.and the wages on your Forms W-2.
Cost-of-living allowances generally are includedOutplacement services. If you choose to
• The general rule: benefits are reported forin your income. However, they are not includedaccept a reduced amount of severance pay so a full calendar year (January 1– Decem-in your income if you are a federal civilian em-that you can receive outplacement services ber 31).ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-(such as training in r´esum´e writing and interviewtioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United • The special accounting period rule: bene-techniques), you must include the unreducedStates. fits provided during the last 2 months ofamount of the severance pay in income.Allowances and differentials that increase the calendar year (or any shorter period)However, you can deduct the value of theseyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less are treated as paid during the followingoutplacement services (up to the difference be-desirable post of duty are part of your compen- calendar year. For example, each yeartween the severance pay included in incomesation and must be included in income. For your employer reports the value of bene-and the amount actually received) as a miscella-example, your compensation includes Foreign fits provided during the last 2 months ofneous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjustedPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical the prior year and the first 10 months ofgross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (Formdifferentials. For more information, see Publica- the current year.1040).tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad. Your employer does not have to use the sameSick pay. Pay you receive from your employer
accounting period for each fringe benefit, butwhile you are sick or injured is part of your salaryNonqualified deferred compensation plans. must use the same period for all employees whoor wages. In addition, you must include in yourYour employer will report to you the total amount receive a particular benefit.income sick pay benefits received from any ofof deferrals for the year under a nonqualified
the following payers.deferred compensation plan. This amount is You must use the same accounting period
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This that you use to report the benefit to claim an• A welfare fund.amount is not included in your income. employee business deduction (for use of a car,
• A state sickness or disability fund. for example).However, if at any time during the tax year,
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is• An association of employers or employ-
not operated under those requirements, all Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-ees.
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other• An insurance company, if your employerand all preceding tax years are included in your compensation) of Form W-2. The total value ofpaid for the plan.income for the current year. This amount is in- your fringe benefits may also be noted in box 14.
cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box The value of your fringe benefits may be addedHowever, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using to your other compensation on one Form W-2, ordent or health insurance policy, the benefits you
code Z. you may receive a separate Form W-2 showingreceive under the policy are not taxable. For
just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withFor information on the requirements and themore information, see Publication 525.
a notation in box 14.amount to include in income, see Internal Reve-
nue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. TheSocial security and Medicare taxes paid by
notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle-employer. If you and your employer have an
tin 2005-2 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/ Accident or Health Planagreement that your employer pays your social
irb05-02.pdf. security and Medicare taxes without deducting
Generally, the value of accident or health planthem from your gross wages, you must report
coverage provided to you by your employer isNote received for services.If your employerthe amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
not included in your income. Benefits you re-gives you a secured note as payment for youron your tax return. The payment is also treated
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-services, you must include the fair market valueas wages for figuring your social security and
plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits.(usually the discount value) of the note in yourMedicare taxes and your social security and
income for the year you receive it. When youMedicare benefits. However, these payments
Long-term care coverage. Contributions bylater receive payments on the note, a propor-are not treated as social security and Medicare
your employer to provide coverage for long-termtionate part of each payment is the recovery ofwages if you are a household worker or a farm
care services generally are not included in yourthe fair market value that you previously in-worker.
income. However, contributions made through acluded in your income. Do not include that part
flexible spending or similar arrangement (suchagain in your income. Include the rest of theStock appreciation rights.Do not include a
as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourpayment in your income in the year of payment.stock appreciation right granted by your em-
income. This amount will be reported as wagesIf your employer gives you a nonnegotiable ployer in income until you exercise (use) the
in box 1 of your Form W-2.unsecured note as payment for your services, right. When you use the right, you are entitled to
Contributions you make to the plan are dis-payments on the note that are credited toward a cash payment equal to the fair market value of
cussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dentalthe principal amount of the note are compensa- the corporation’s stock on the date of use minus
Expenses.tion income when you receive them. the fair market value on the date the right was
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 43

Page 46 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Archer MSA contributions. Contributions by ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000
your employer to your Archer MSA generally are nection with your adoption of an eligible child. of coverage reduced by any amount you pay
not included in your income. Their total will be See the Instructions for Form 8839, for more toward the purchase of the insurance.
reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You information. For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded,
must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer  Adoption benefits are reported by your em- and Entire cost taxed, later.
MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They If your employer provided more than $50,000
tracts. File the form with your return. are also included as social security and Medi- of coverage, the amount included in your in-
If your employer does not make contributions care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are come is reported as part of your wages in box 1
to your MSA, you can make your own contribu- not included as wages in box 1. To determine of your Form W-2. It is also shown separately in
tions to your MSA. These contributions are dis- the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must box 12 with code C.
cussed in Publication 969, Health Savingscomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-Group-term life insurance.This insurance isAccounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. tion Expenses. File the form with your return.term life insurance protection (insurance for aAlso, see Form 8853. fixed period of time) that:
Health flexible spending arrangement
• Provides a general death benefit,De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits(health FSA). If your employer provides a
• Is provided to a group of employees,health FSA that qualifies as an accident orIf your employer provides you with a product orhealth plan, the amount of your salary reduction,service and the cost of it is so small that it would• Is provided under a policy carried by theand reimbursements of your medical care ex-be unreasonable for the employer to account foremployer, andpenses and those of your spouse and depen-it, the value is not included in your income.• Provides an amount of insurance to eachdents, generally are not included in your income.Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-employee based on a formula that pre-counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). vents individual selection.when working overtime, and company picnicsIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifies
are not included in your income.as an accident or health plan, coverage and Permanent benefits.If your group-term lifereimbursements of your medical care expensesHoliday gifts.If your employer gives you ainsurance policy includes permanent benefits,and those of your spouse and dependents gen-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atsuch as a paid-up or cash surrender value, youerally are not included in your income. Christmas or other holidays, do not include themust include in your income, as wages, the costSee also Reimbursement for medical carevalue of the gift in your income. However, if yourof the permanent benefits minus the amount youunder Other Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or apay for them. Your employer should be able to
similar item that you can easily exchange fortell you the amount to include in your income.Health savings accounts (HSA).If you are
cash, you include the value of that gift as extraan eligible individual, you and any other person, Accidental death benefits.Insurance thatsalary or wages regardless of the amount in-including your employer or a family member, provides accidental or other death benefits butvolved.can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- does not provide general death benefits (traveltions, other than employer contributions, are de- insurance, for example) is not group-term lifeductible on your return whether or not you insurance.Educational Assistanceitemize deductions. Contributions made by your
Former employer. If your former employeremployer are not included in your income. Distri-You can exclude from your income up to $5,250provided more than $50,000 of group-term lifebutions from your HSA that are used to payof qualified employer-provided educational as-insurance coverage during the year, the amountqualified medical expenses are not included insistance. For more information, see Publicationincluded in your income is reported as wages inyour income. Distributions not used for qualified970, Tax Benefits for Education. box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separatelymedical expenses are included in your income.
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show theSee Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans, for more
Employer-Provided Vehicles care taxes on the excess coverage, with codesinformation.
M and N. You must pay these taxes with yourContributions by a partnership to a bona fide If your employer provides a car (or other high-income tax return. Include them in your total taxpartner’s HSA are not contributions by an em-way motor vehicle) to you, your personal use ofon line 63, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and theployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-the car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-amount of the taxes on the dotted line next tobution of money and are not included in thefit. line 63.partner’s gross income. Contributions by a part-Your employer must determine the actualnership to a partner’s HSA for services rendered Two or more employers. Your exclusion forvalue of this fringe benefit to include in yourare treated as guaranteed payments that are employer-provided group-term life insuranceincome. For more information, see Publicationincludible in the partner’s gross income. In both coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of525.situations, the partner can deduct the contribu- coverage, whether the insurance is provided bytion made to the partner’s HSA. Certain employer-provided transpor-a single employer or multiple employers. If twoContributions by an S corporation to a 2% tation can be excluded from gross in-or more employers provide insurance coverageshareholder-employee’s HSA for services ren- come. See the discussion on
TIP
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-dered are treated as guaranteed payments and Transportation, later. ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not beare includible in the shareholder-employee’s correct. You must figure how much to include ingross income. The shareholder-employee can your income. Reduce the amount you figure bydeduct the contribution made to the Group-Term Life Insurance any amount reported with code C in box 12 ofshareholder-employee’s HSA. your Forms W-2, add the result to the wagesGenerally, the cost of up to $50,000 of reported in box 1, and report the total on yourgroup-term life insurance coverage provided toreturn.you by your employer (or former employer) is notAdoption Assistance
included in your income. However, you must
You may be able to exclude from your income include in income the cost of employer-provided
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
Page 44 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 47 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring the taxable cost.Use the followingWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of Retirement Planning Services
worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourGroup-Term Life Insurance to If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,income. Include in Income—Illustrated qualified retirement planning services provided
to you (and your spouse) by your employer areWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the Cost of 1.Enter the total amount of
not included in your income. Qualified servicesGroup-Term Life Insurance To your insurance coverage
include retirement planning advice, informationfrom your employer(s).... 1. 80,000Include in Income
about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-2.Limit on exclusion for
employer-provided formation about how the plan may fit into your1.Enter the total amount of
group-term life insurance overall individual retirement income plan. Youyour insurance coverage
coverage............. 2. 50,000from your employer(s).... 1. cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,
3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. 30,0002.Limit on exclusion for accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-
4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.employer-provided vided by your employer.
Figure to the nearest tenth4. 30.0group-term life insurance
coverage............. 2. 50,000 5.Go to Table 5-1. Using your
age on the last day of the tax3.Subtract line 2 from line 1 . .3. Transportationyear, find your age group in4.Divide line 3 by $1,000.
the left column, and enter theFigure to the nearest tenth4. If your employer provides you with a qualified
cost from the column on the5.Go to Table 5-1. Using your transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedright for your age group . . .5. .23age on the last day of the tax from your income, up to certain limits. A qualified6.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. 6.90year, find your age group in transportation fringe benefit is:7.Enter the number of fullthe left column, and enter the
months of coverage at thiscost from the column on the • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-cost................. 7. 12right for your age group . . .5. hicle (such as a van) between your home8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8. 82.806.Multiply line 4 by line 5.... 6. and work place,9.Enter the premiums7.Enter the number of full
• A transit pass, oryou paid per month9. 4.15months of coverage at this
cost................. 7. 10.Enter the number • Qualified parking.of months you paid8.Multiply line 6 by line 7.... 8.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for thesethe premiums . . .10. 129.Enter the premiums
expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. 49.80you paid per month9.
12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. rangement is also excludable. However, cash10.Enter the number
Include this amount in yourof months you paid reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable
income as wages ....... 12. 33.00the premiums . . .10. only if a voucher or similar item that can be
11.Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . .11. exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
12.Subtract line 11 from line 8. available for direct distribution to you.
Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed onInclude this amount in your
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of theincome as wages ....... 12. Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuter
following circumstances apply. highway vehicle transportation and transit pass
fringe benefits cannot be more than a total of1. You are permanently and totally disabledTable 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of $105 a month.and have ended your employment.Group-Term Life Insurance for One The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-Month benefit cannot be more than $200 a month.icy for the entire period the insurance is in
If the benefits have a value that is more thanforce during the tax year.Age Cost
these limits, the excess must be included in yourUnder 25 .................. $. 0 5 3. A charitable organization (defined in chap-income.25 through 29............... . 0 6 ter 24) to which contributions are deducti-30 through 34............... . 0 8 Commuter highway vehicle. This is able is the only beneficiary of the policy for35 through 39............... . 0 9 the entire period the insurance is in forcehighway vehicle that seats at least six adults (not40 through 44............... . 1 0 during the tax year. (You are not entitled toincluding the driver). At least 80% of the45 through 49............... . 1 5 a deduction for a charitable contribution forvehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expected50 through 54............... . 2 3 naming a charitable organization as theto be:55 through 59............... . 4 3 beneficiary of your policy.)60 through 64............... . 6 6 • For transporting employees between their65 through 69............... 1.27 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:homes and work place, and70 and older................ 2.06
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and• On trips during which employees occupy
were covered by the plan when you re- at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingExample. You are 51 years old and work for tired, or capacity (not including the driver).employers A and B. Both employers provide
b. You reached age 55 before January 2,group-term life insurance coverage for you for
Transit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-1984, and were employed by the em-the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with
card, voucher, or similar item entitling a personployer or its predecessor in 1983.employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You
to ride mass transit (whether public or private)pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuterployer B group plan. You figure the amount to
Entire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entireinclude in your income as follows. highway vehicle operated by a person in the
cost of group-term life insurance if either of thebusiness of transporting persons for compensa-
following circumstances apply. tion.
• The insurance is provided by your em- Qualified parking.This is parking provided
ployer through a qualified employees’to an employee at or near the employer’s place
trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedof business. It also includes parking provided on
annuity plan. or near a location from which the employee
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com-• You are a key employee and your
muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does notemployer’s plan discriminates in favor of
key employees. include parking at or near the employee’s home.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 45

Page 48 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for aRetirement Plan Stock Options member of the clergy is usually treated as any
Contributions other pension or annuity. It must be reported onIf you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or selllines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12astock or other property as payment for yourYour employer’s contributions to a qualified re- and 12b of Form 1040A.services, you usually will have income when youtirement plan for you are not included in incomereceive the option, when you exercise the optionHousing.  Special rules for housing apply toat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),members of the clergy. Under these rules, youyou whether your retirement plan is qualified.)
or when you sell or otherwise dispose of thedo not include in your income the rental value ofHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage
option. However, if your option is a statutorya home (including utilities) or a designated hous-included in the plan may have to be included.
stock option, you will not have any income untiling allowance provided to you as part of yourSee Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier, under
you sell or exchange your stock. Your employer pay. However, the exclusion cannot be moreFringe Benefits.
than the reasonable pay for your service. If youcan tell you which kind of option you hold. ForIf your employer pays into a nonqualified
pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-more information, see Publication 525.plan for you, you generally must include the
ance designated for utility cost, up to your actualcontributions in your income as wages for the
cost. The home or allowance must be providedtax year in which the contributions are made.Restricted Property as compensation for your services as an or-However, if your interest in the plan is not trans-
dained, licensed, or commissioned minister.ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-Generally, if you receive property for your serv-However, you must include the rental value ofture (you have a good chance of losing it) at theices, you must include its fair market value inthe home or the housing allowance as earningstime of the contribution, you do not have toyour income in the year you receive the prop-from self-employment on Schedule SE (Forminclude the value of your interest in your incomeerty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-1040) if you are subject to the self-employmentuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to aerty that has certain restrictions that affect itstax. For more information, see Publication 517,substantial risk of forfeiture. value, you do not include the value of the prop-Social Security and Other Information for Mem-erty in your income until it has substantiallyElective deferrals.If you are covered by cer- bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.vested. (You can choose to include the value oftain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to
the property in your income in the year it ishave part of your compensation contributed by
Members of Religioustransferred to you.) For more information, seeyour employer to a retirement fund, rather than
Restricted Property in Publication 525.have it paid to you. The amount you set aside Orders
(called an elective deferral) is treated as anDividends received on restricted stock.employer contribution to a qualified plan. It is not If you are a member of a religious order who hasDividends you receive on restricted stock areincluded in wages subject to income tax at the taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningstreated as compensation and not as dividendtime contributed. However, it is included in that you renounce and turn over to the orderincome. Your employer should include thesewages subject to social security and Medicare depends on whether your services are per-payments on your Form W-2.taxes. formed for the order.
Stock you chose to include in income.Elective deferrals include elective contribu- Services performed for the order.If you areDividends you receive on restricted stock youtions to the following retirement plans. performing the services as an agent of the orderchose to include in your income in the yearin the exercise of duties required by the order,1. Cash or deferred arrangements (sectiontransferred are treated the same as any otherdo not include in your income the amounts401(k) plans). dividends. Report them on your return as divi-turned over to the order.dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- If your order directs you to perform servicester 8.ees. for another agency of the supervising church or  For information on how to treat dividendsan associated institution, you are considered to3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-reported on both your Form W-2 and Form be performing the services as an agent of thesion plans (SARSEP). 1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedorder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-stock in Publication 525. order that you turn over to the order are notees (SIMPLE plans). included in your income.
5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).
Example. You are a member of a church6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. order and have taken a vow of poverty. YouSpecial Rules for
renounce any claims to your earnings and turn7. Section 457 plans.
over to the order any salaries or wages youCertain Employees
earn. You are a registered nurse, so your orderOverall limit on deferrals.For 2005, you
assigns you to work in a hospital that is angenerally should not have deferred more than aThis section deals with special rules for people
associated institution of the church. However,total of $14,000 of contributions to the plansin certain types of employment: members of the
you remain under the general direction and con-listed in (1) through (6) above. You should notclergy, members of religious orders, people
trol of the order. You are considered to be anhave deferred more than the lesser of your in-working for foreign employers, military person-
agent of the order and any wages you earn atcludible compensation or $14,000 of contribu-nel, and volunteers. the hospital that you turn over to your order aretions to the plan listed in (7) above (section 457
not included in your income.plan).
Clergy
Excess deferrals.Your employer or plan Services performed outside the order.If
administrator should apply the proper annual you are directed to work outside the order, yourIf you are a member of the clergy, you must
limit when figuring your plan contributions. How- services are not an exercise of duties requiredinclude in your income offerings and fees you
ever, you are responsible for monitoring the total by the order unless they meet both of the follow-receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
you defer to ensure that the deferrals are not ing requirements.masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
more than the overall limit. offering is made to the religious institution, it is• They are the kind of services that are ordi-If you set aside more than the limit, the ex-not taxable to you. narily the duties of members of the order.cess generally must be included in your income   If you are a member of a religious organiza-for that year. See Publication 525 for a discus- • They are part of the duties that you musttion and you give your outside earnings to thesion of the tax treatment of excess deferrals. exercise for, or on behalf of, the religiousorganization, you still must include the earningsorder as its agent.in your income. However, you may be entitled toCatch-up contributions.You may be al-
a charitable contribution deduction for thelowed catch-up contributions (additional elective If you are an employee of a third party, the
amount paid to the organization. See chapterdeferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end of services you perform for the third party will not
your tax year. 24. be considered directed or required of you by the
Page 46 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 49 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
order. Amounts you receive for these services Taxable allowances. The following al-Militaryare included in your income, even if you have lowances must be included in your income and
taken a vow of poverty. reported as wages. Payments you receive as a member of a military
service generally are taxed as wages except for• Allowances paid to your spouse and minorExample. Mark Brown is a member of a retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.children while you are a volunteer leaderreligious order and has taken a vow of poverty.Allowances generally are not taxed. For moretraining in the United States.He renounces all claims to his earnings andinformation on the tax treatment of military al-turns over his earnings to the order. • Living allowances designated by the Di-lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-Armed Forces’ Tax Guide.by the superiors of the order to get a job with a pensation. These are allowances for
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-Military retirement pay.If your retirement personal items such as domestic help,
ployee of the school, and, at his request, the pay is based on age or length of service, it islaundry and clothing maintenance, enter-
school made the salary payments directly to the taxable and must be included in your income astainment and recreation, transportation,
order. a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or and other miscellaneous expenses.
Because Mark is an employee of the school, on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
• Leave allowances.he is performing services for the school rather include in your income the amount of any reduc-
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a• Readjustment allowances or termination
earns working for the school are included in his survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenpayments. These are considered received
income. under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec- by you when credited to your account.
tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For more detailed discussion of survivor an-Foreign Employer Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpsnuities, see chapter 10.
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignDisability.If you are retired on disability,allowance during his period of service, to be paidemployer. see  Military and Government Disability Pen-to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. duty. Although the allowance is not available toU.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen who
him until the end of his service, Gary must in-works in the United States for a foreign govern-Veterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isment, an international organization, a foreigncome any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,credited to his account.embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustregulation, or administrative practice adminis-
include your salary in your income. tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orSocial security and Medicare taxes.You you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includetheir families are not taxable.are exempt from social security and Medicare meal and lodging allowances paid to you in youremployee taxes if you are employed in the • Education, training, and subsistence al-income as wages.United States by an international organization orlowances.
a foreign government. However, you must pay National Senior Services Corps programs.• Disability compensation and pension pay-self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- Do not include in your income amounts youments for disabilities paid either to veter-ices performed in the United States, even receive for supportive services or reimburse-ans or their families.though you are not self-employed. This rule also ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-applies if you are an employee of a qualifying• Grants for homes designed for wheelchairlowing programs.wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-living.
ernment. • Retired Senior Volunteer Program• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who(RSVP).Employees of international organizations or lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
foreign governments. Your compensation • Foster Grandparent Program.• Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-for official services to an international organiza-dends paid either to veterans or their ben-• Senior Companion Program.tion is exempt from federal income tax if you areeficiaries, including the proceeds of anot a citizen of the United States or you are aveteran’s endowment policy paid beforecitizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are Service Corps of Retired Executivesdeath.a citizen of the United States). (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-
Your compensation for official services to a• Interest on insurance dividends you leaveive services or reimbursements for
foreign government is exempt from federal in-on deposit with the VA. out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not
come tax if all of the following are true. include these amounts in income.• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
• You are not a citizen of the United Statestance program.
Volunteer tax counseling.Do not include inor you are a citizen of the Philippines• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of ayour income any reimbursements you receive(whether or not you are a citizen of the member of the Armed Forces who died for transportation, meals, and other expensesUnited States). after September 10, 2001. you have in training for, or actually providing,
• Your work is like the work done by em- volunteer federal income tax counseling for the
ployees of the United States in foreignRehabilitative program payments. VA elderly (TCE).
countries. payments to hospital patients and resident vet-You can deduct as a charitable contributionerans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-• The foreign government gives an equal your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses intic or rehabilitative programs are not treated asexemption to employees of the United taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-nontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report theseStates in its country. tance (VITA) program. See chapter 24.payments as income on Form 1040, line 21.
Waiver of alien status.If you are an alien
who works for a foreign government or interna-Volunteers
tional organization and you file a waiver under Sickness and InjuryThe tax treatment of amounts you receive as asection 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarity Act to keep your immigrant status, different Benefitsagency is covered in the following discussions.rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-
cation 525. This section discusses sickness and injury ben-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive
efits including disability pensions, long-termEmployment abroad. For information on the as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader
care insurance contracts, workers’ compensa-tax treatment of income earned abroad, see for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,
tion, and other benefits.Publication 54. and clothing are exempt from tax.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 47

Page 50 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the age at which you can first receive a pension ice and are later given a retroactive service-con-Disability Pensions or annuity if you are not disabled. nected disability rating by the VA, your
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-Generally, if you retire on disability, you mustmum retirement age, payments you receive arecluded from income up to the amount of VAreport your pension or annuity as income.taxable as a pension or annuity. Report thedisability benefits you would have been entitled
You may be entitled to a tax credit ifpayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orto receive. You can claim a refund of any tax
you were permanently and totally dis-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rulespaid on the excludable amount (subject to the
abled when you retired. For informa-for reporting pensions are explained in How To
TIP
statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-
tion on this credit and the definition of permanentReport in chapter 10. turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
and total disability, see chapter 33. during the retroactive period.
For information on disability payments from a If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-governmental program provided as a substituteMilitary and Government ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-for unemployment compensation, see chapterDisability Pensions ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance12. benefit from your income. However, you must
Certain military and government disability pen-include in your income any lump-sum readjust-Disability income.Generally, you must reportsions are not taxable. ment or other nondisability severance paymentas income any amount you receive for personal you received on release from active duty, even ifService-connected disability.You may beinjury or sickness through an accident or health you are later given a retroactive disability ratingable to exclude from income amounts you re-plan that is paid for by your employer. If both you by the VA.ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowanceand your employer pay for the plan, only the
for personal injury or sickness resulting fromamount you receive that is due to your Terrorist attack or military action.Do notactive service in one of the following govern-employer’s payments is reported as income. include in your income disability payments youment services.However, certain payments may not be taxable receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-to you. Your employer should be able to give you• The armed forces of any country. rorist or military action.specific details about your pension plan and tell
• The National Oceanic and Atmosphericyou the amount you paid for your disability pen-
Administration.sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui- Long-Term Care
ties, you may be receiving other payments for• The Public Health Service. Insurance Contractssickness and injury.
• The Foreign Service. Long-term care insurance contracts generallyDo not report as income any amounts
are treated as accident and health insurancepaid to reimburse you for medical ex-Conditions for exclusion.Do not include contracts. Amounts you receive from thempenses you incurred after the plan
TIP
the disability payments in your income if any of(other than policyholder dividends or premiumwas established. the following conditions apply. refunds) generally are excludable from income
Cost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of as amounts received for personal injury or sick-1. You were entitled to receive a disability
a health or accident insurance plan, do not in- ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madepayment before September 25, 1975.
clude any amounts you receive from the plan for on a per diem or other periodic basis under a2. You were a member of a listed govern-personal injury or sickness as income on your long-term care insurance contract, you must filement service or its reserve component, ortax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- Form 8853 with your return.were under a binding written commitmentcal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, A long-term care insurance contract is anto become a member, on September 24,you may have to include some, or all, of the insurance contract that only provides coverage1975.reimbursement in your income. See  Reim- for qualified long-term care services. The con-
bursement in a later year in chapter 21. 3. You receive the disability payments for atract must:
combat-related injury. This is a personalCafeteria plans.Generally, if you are cov- • Be guaranteed renewable,injury or sickness that:ered by an accident or health insurance plan
• Not provide for a cash surrender value orthrough a cafeteria plan, and the amount of thea. Results directly from armed conflict, other money that can be paid, assigned,insurance premiums was not included in your
pledged, or borrowed,b. Takes place while you are engaged inincome, you are not considered to have paid the
extra-hazardous service,premiums and you must include any benefits • Provide that refunds, other than refundsyou receive in your income. If the amount of the on the death of the insured or completec. Takes place under conditions simulat-premiums was included in your income, you are surrender or cancellation of the contract,ing war, including training exercisesconsidered to have paid the premiums, and any and dividends under the contract may besuch as maneuvers, orbenefits you receive are not taxable. used only to reduce future premiums ord. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.increase future benefits, andRetirement and profit-sharing plans.If you
receive payments from a retirement or • Generally not pay or reimburse expenses4. You would be entitled to receive disability
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- incurred for services or items that wouldcompensation from the Department of Vet-
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a be reimbursed under Medicare, excepterans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
disability pension. The payments must be re- where Medicare is a secondary payer ortion for it. Your exclusion under this
ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor- the contract makes per diem or other peri-condition is equal to the amount you would
mation on pensions, see chapter 10. odic payments without regard to ex-be entitled to receive from the VA.
penses.
Accrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-Pension based on years of service.If youbility, any lump-sum payment you receive forreceive a disability pension based on years ofQualified long-term care services.Qualifiedaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. Theservice, you generally must include it in yourlong-term care services are:payment is not a disability payment. Include it inincome. However, if the pension qualifies for theyour income in the tax year you receive it. • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-cussed earlier), do not include in income the partHow to report.If you retired on disability, you habilitative services, and maintenance andof your pension that you would have received ifmust include in income any disability pension personal care services, andthe pension had been based on a percentage ofyou receive under a plan that is paid for by yourdisability. You must include the rest of your pen-• Required by a chronically ill individual andemployer. You must report your taxable disabil-sion in your income. provided pursuant to a plan of care asity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or
prescribed by a licensed health care prac-Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire-Retroactive VA determination.If you retire
titioner.ment age. Minimum retirement age generally is from the armed services based on years of serv-
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 51 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-  You can deduct the amount you spend to
dividual is one who has been certified by aroad Retirement Benefits. buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be
licensed health care practitioner within the previ- eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatReturn to work.   If you return to work afterous 12 months as one of the following. period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toqualifying for workers’ compensation, salarythe 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).• An individual who, for at least 90 days, ispayments you receive for performing light dutiesIf you buy back sick leave in the same year youunable to perform at least two activities ofare taxable as wages. used it, the amount reduces your taxable sickdaily living without substantial assistance leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-Other Sickness and Injuryties of daily living are eating, toileting,
Other compensation. Many other amountstransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-Benefits
you receive as compensation for sickness ornence.
injury are not taxable. These include the follow-In addition to disability pensions and annuities,• An individual who requires substantial su- ing amounts.you may receive other payments for sickness orpervision to be protected from threats toinjury.health and safety due to severe cognitive • Compensatory damages you receive for
impairment. physical injury or physical sickness,Railroad sick pay.   Payments you receive as
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicsick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
payments.surance Act are taxable and you must includeLimit on exclusion.You can generally ex- them in your income. However, do not includeclude from gross income up to $240 a day for • Benefits you receive under an accident orthem in your income if they are for an on-the-job2005. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-Term health insurance policy on which eitherinjury.Care Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and you paid the premiums or your employerIf you received income because of a disabil-Injury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor- paid the premiums but you had to includeity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.mation. them in your income.
Federal Employees’ Compensation Act • Disability benefits you receive for loss of
(FECA). Payments received under this Act forWorkers’ Compensation income or earning capacity as a result ofpersonal injury or sickness, including paymentsinjuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-Amounts you receive as workers’ compensation to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.icy.for an occupational sickness or injury are fully However, you are taxed on amounts you receive
• Compensation you receive for permanentexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45
loss or loss of use of a part or function ofcompensation act or a statute in the nature of a days while a claim is being decided. Report this
your body, or for your permanent disfig-workers’ compensation act. The exemption also income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or
urement. This compensation must beapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how- on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sick
based only on the injury and not on theever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits leave while a claim is being processed is taxable
period of your absence from work. Theseyou receive based on your age, length of serv- and must be included in your income as wages.
benefits are not taxable even if your em-ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if youIf part of the payments you receive ployer pays for the accident and healthretired because of an occupational sickness or under FECA reduces your social se- plan that provides these benefits.injury. curity or equivalent railroad retirementCAUTION
!
If part of your workers’ compensation benefits received, that part is considered social
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-reduces your social security or security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-
bursement for medical care is generally not tax-equivalent railroad retirement benefits fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theCAUTION
!
able. However, it may reduce your medicalreceived, that part is considered social security taxability of these benefits, see Social security
expense deduction. For more information, see(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andand equivalent railroad retirement benefits
chapter 21.may be taxable. For more information, see Pub- under Other Income, in Publication 525.
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 49

Page 52 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Keep copies of documents that show your If your total tips for any one month from any
one job are less than $20, do not report the tipstips, such as restaurant bills and credit
for that month to that employer.card charge slips.
6. Do not report the value of any noncash tips,You should keep your daily tip record with yoursuch as tickets or passes, to your employer. Youpersonal records. You must keep your recordsdo not pay social security and Medicare taxes orfor as long as they are important for administra-railroad retirement tax on these tips.tion of the federal tax law. For information onTip Income how long to keep records, see Publication 552,How to report.   If your employer does not
give you any other way to report tips, you canRecordkeeping for Individuals.
use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked for  If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form
on the form, sign and date the form, and give it toIntroduction 4070A, Employee’s Daily Record of Tips. To get
your employer. To get a year’s supply of theForm 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue ServiceThis chapter is for employees who receive tips. form, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica-(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244.All tips you receive are income and are sub- tion 1244.Publication 1244 includes a year’s supply ofject to federal income tax. You must include in If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-Form 4070A. Each day, write in the informationgross income all tips you receive directly, ployer a statement with the following informa-asked for on the form.charged tips that are paid to you by your em- tion.If you do not use Form 4070A, start yourployer, and your share of any tips you receive • Your name, address, and social securityrecords by writing your name, your employer’sunder a tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement. number.name, and the name of the business if it isThe value of noncash tips, such as tickets,different from your employer’s name. Then, • Your employer’s name, address, and busi-passes, or other items of value are also incomeeach workday, write the date and the followingness name (if it is different from theand subject to tax. information. employer’s name).Reporting your tip income correctly is not
difficult. You must do three things. • Cash tips you get directly from customers• The month (or the dates of any shorter
or from other employees. period) in which you received tips.
1. Keep a daily tip record. • Tips from credit card charge customers • The total tips required to be reported for
2. Report tips to your employer. that your employer pays you. (Also include that period.
tips from debit card charge customers.)3. Report all your tips on your income tax You must sign and date the statement. You
return. should keep a copy with your personal records.• The value of any noncash tips you get,
such as tickets, passes, or other items ofYour employer may require you to report yourvalue.This chapter will show you how to do these three tips more than once a month. However, the
things and what to do on your tax return if you statement cannot cover a period of more than• The amount of tips you paid out to otherhave not done the first two. This chapter will also one calendar month.employees through tip pools or tip split-show you how to treat allocated tips. ting, or other arrangements, and the Electronic tip statement.Your employer
names of the employees to whom you can have you furnish your tip statements elec-Useful Items paid the tips. tronically.
You may want to see:
When to report. Give your report for eachDo not write in your tip diary themonth to your employer by the 10th of the nextPublication amount of any service charge thatmonth. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday,your employer adds to a customer’s❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income CAUTION
!
or legal holiday, give your employer the report bybill and then pays to you and treats as wages.the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or❏ 1244 Employee’s Daily Record of Tips This is part of your wages, not a tip. legal holiday.and Report to Employer
Electronic tip record.You may use an
Example 1. You must report your tips re-Form (and Instructions) electronic system provided by your employer to
ceived in April 2006 by May 10, 2006.record your daily tips. You must receive and❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Taxkeep a paper copy of this record.on Unreported Tip Income Example 2. You must report your tips re-
ceived in May 2006 by June 12, 2006. June 10th❏ 4070 Employee’s Report of Tips to
is on a Saturday, and the 12th is the next dayEmployer
that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
Reporting Tips to Your
Final report.If your employment ends dur-
ing the month, you can report your tips whenEmployer
your employment ends.Keeping a Daily Tip
Penalty for not reporting tips.If you do notWhy report tips to your employer? You
Record report tips to your employer as required, youmust report tips to your employer so that:
may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the
• Your employer can withhold federal in-social security and Medicare taxes or railroadWhy keep a daily tip record?You must keep come tax and social security and Medicareretirement tax you owe on the unreported tips.a daily tip record so you can: taxes or railroad retirement tax, (For information about these taxes, see Report-
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips• Report your tips accurately to your em-• Your employer can report the correct not reported to your employer under Reportingployer, amount of your earnings to the Social Se-Tips on Your Tax Return, later.) The penaltycurity Administration or Railroad Retire-• Report your tips accurately on your tax amount is in addition to the taxes you owe.ment Board (which affects your benefitsreturn, and You can avoid this penalty if you can showwhen you retire or if you become disabled,reasonable cause for not reporting the tips to• Prove your tip income if your return is everor your family’s benefits if you die), andyour employer. To do so, attach a statement toquestioned.
• You can avoid the penalty for not reportingyour return explaining why you did not report
them.tips to your employer (explained later).How to keep a daily tip record.There are two
ways to keep a daily tip record. You can either: Giving your employer money for taxes.
What tips to report.Report to your employerYour regular pay may not be enough for your
only cash, check, debit, or credit card tips you1. Write information about your tips in a tip employer to withhold all the taxes you owe on
diary, or receive. your regular pay plus your reported tips. If this
Page 50 Chapter 6 Tip Income

Page 53 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
happens, you can give your employer money and noncash tips, on your tax return. Any tips to file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot file
until the close of the calendar year to pay theyou reported to your employer for 2005 are in-Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxes
rest of the taxes. cluded in the wages shown in box 1 of your Formin your total tax amount on line 63, and write
W-2. Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you“UT” and the total of the uncollected taxes on theIf you do not give your employer enough
did not report to your employer. dotted line next to line 63.money, your employer will apply your regular
pay and any money you give to the taxes in the If you received $20 or more in cashfollowing order. and charge tips in a month and did not
report all of those tips to your em-CAUTION
!
1. All taxes on your regular pay. ployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-Allocated Tips
care taxes on tips not reported to your employer,2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail-
If your employer allocated tips to you, they arelater.road retirement tax on your reported tips.
shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.If you did not keep a daily tip record as3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on They are not included in box 1 with your wagesrequired and an amount is shown inyour reported tips. and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-box 8 of your Form W-2, see Allo-CAUTION
!
Any taxes that remain unpaid can be col- sion does not apply to you.cated Tips, later.lected by your employer from your next If you kept a daily tip record and reported tipspaycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol- What are allocated tips?These are tips thatto your employer as required under the ruleslected at the end of the year, you may be subject your employer assigned to you in addition to theexplained earlier, add the following tips to theto a penalty for underpayment of estimated tips you reported to your employer for the year.amount in box 1 of your Form W-2.taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding Your employer will have done this only if:and Estimated Tax, for more information. • Cash and charge tips you received that
• You worked in a restaurant, cocktailtotaled less than $20 for any month.Uncollected taxes.  You must report lounge, or similar business that must allo-on your tax return any social security• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,cate tips to employees, andand Medicare taxes or railroad retire-CAUTION
!
passes, or other items of value.ment tax that remained uncollected at the end of • The tips you reported to your employer
2005. See Reporting uncollected social security were less than your share of 8% of foodExample. John Allen began working at theand Medicare taxes on tips under Reporting and drink sales.Tips on Your Tax Return, later. These uncol-Diamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2005)
lected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2005on June 30 and received $10,000 in wages
How were your allocated tips figured?TheForm W-2 (codes A and B). during the year. John kept a daily tip record
tips allocated to you are your share of an amountshowing that his tips for June were $18 and his
figured by subtracting the reported tips of alltips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. HeTip Rate Determination employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)was not required to report his June tips to his
and Education Program of food and drink sales (other than carryoutemployer, but he reported all of the rest of his
sales and sales with a service charge of 10% ortips to his employer as required.Your employer may participate in the Tip Rate more). Your share of that amount was figuredJohn’s Form W-2 from Diamond RestaurantDetermination and Education Program. The pro- using either a method provided by anshows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re-gram was developed to help employees and employer-employee agreement or a methodported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre-employers understand and meet their tip report- provided by IRS regulations based on employ-ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018ing responsibilities. ees’ sales or hours worked. For informationas wages on his tax return.There are two agreements under the pro- about the exact allocation method used, ask
gram: the Tip Rate Determination Agreement your employer.Reporting social security and Medicare(TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com-
taxes on tips not reported to your employer.mitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in the Must you report your allocated tips on yourIf you received $20 or more in cash and chargefood and beverage industry may be able to get return? You must report allocated tips on yourtips in a month from any one job and did notapproval of an employer-designed EmTRAC tax return unless either of the following excep-report all of those tips to your employer, youprogram. For information on the EmTRAC pro- tions applies.must report the social security and Medicaregram, see Notice 2001-1, which is on page 261
taxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onof Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2 at 1. You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01–02.pdf. your return. To report these taxes, you must filedence that is as credible and as reliable asa return even if you would not otherwise have toIf you are employed in the gaming industry, a daily tip record, as required under rulesfile. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileyour employer may have a Gaming Industry Tip explained earlier.Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)Compliance Agreement Program. See Revenue
2. Your tip record is incomplete, but it showsProcedure 2003-35, which is on page 919 of Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enter
that your actual tips were more than theInternal Revenue Bulletin No. 2003-20 at the tax on line 59, Form 1040, and attach Form
tips you reported to your employer plus thewww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03–20.pdf. 4137 to your return.
allocated tips.Your employer can provide you with a copy If you are subject to the Railroad Re-of any applicable agreement. If you want to learn If either exception applies, report your actual tipstirement Tax Act, you cannot usemore about these agreements, contact your lo- on your return. Do not report the allocated tips.Form 4137 to pay railroad retirementCAUTION
!
cal IRS Taxpayer Education Communication See What tips to report under Reporting Tips ontax on unreported tips. To get railroad retirement(TEC) office. You may call 1-800-829-4933 for Your Tax Return, earlier.credit, you must report tips to your employer.the IRS TEC office in your area or send an email
to TEC.TIP.Program@irs.gov. How to report allocated tips.If you mustReporting uncollected social security and
report allocated tips on your return, add theMedicare taxes on tips. If your employer
amount in box 8 of your Form W-2 to the amountcould not collect all the social security and Medi-
in box 1. Report the total as wages on line 7 ofcare taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on
Form 1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ orReporting Tips on Yourtips reported for 2005, the uncollected taxes will
Form 1040A.)be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 (codes A
Tax Return and B). You must report these amounts as addi-Because social security and Medicare taxes
tional tax on your return. You may have uncol-were not withheld from the allocated tips, you
lected taxes if your regular pay was not enoughmust report those taxes as additional tax on yourHow to report tips.  Report your tips with
for your employer to withhold all the taxes youreturn. Complete Form 4137, and include theyour wages on line 1, Form 1040EZ, or line 7,
owe and you did not give your employer enoughallocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-Form 1040A or Form 1040.
money to pay the rest of the taxes. ing social security and Medicare taxes on tips
not reported to your employer under ReportingTo report these uncollected taxes, you mustWhat tips to report.You must report all tips
Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier.you received in 2005, including both cash tips file a return even if you would not otherwise have
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 51

Page 54 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest on an account owned by your child,
even though the interest is paid to you as custo-General Information dian.
7. A few items of general interest are covered here.Penalty for failure to supply SSN.If you
do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,Recordkeeping. You should keep a you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure tolist showing sources and amounts ofsupply social security number under Penalties ininterest received during the year.RECORDS
Interest Income chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.Also, keep the forms you receive that show your
interest income (Forms 1099-INT, for example)Backup withholding. Your interest income isas an important part of your records. generally not subject to regular withholding.
Reminder However, it may be subject to backup withhold-Tax on investment income of a child under
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on theage 14. Part of a child’s 2005 investment in-
income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofForeign-source income.If you are a U.S. citi-come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This
interest must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofzen with interest income from sources outsidemay happen if all the following are true.
the amount you are paid.the United States (foreign income), you must
1. The child was under age 14 at the end ofBackup withholding may also be required ifreport that income on your tax return unless it is
2005. A child born on January 1, 1992, isthe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you
considered to be age 14 at the end ofmined that you underreported your interest orreside inside or outside the United States and
2005. dividend income. For more information, seewhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
Backup Withholding in chapter 4.foreign payer. 2. The child had more than $1,600 of invest-
ment income (such as taxable interest andReporting backup withholding.If backup
dividends) and has to file a tax return.withholding is deducted from your interest in-
come, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INT3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2005.for the year that indicates the amount withheld.Introduction If all these statements are true, Form 8615, TaxThe Form 1099-INT will show any backup with-
for Children Under Age 14 Who Have Invest-This chapter discusses: holding as “Federal income tax withheld.”
ment Income of More Than $1,600, must be
• Different types of interest income, Joint accounts.If two or more persons holdcompleted and attached to the child’s tax return.
property (such as a savings account or bond) asIf any of these statements is not true, Form 8615• What interest is taxable and what interest joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenantsis not required and the child’s income is taxed atis nontaxable, in common, each person’s share of any interesthis or her own tax rate.
• When to report interest income, and from the property is determined by local law.However, the parent can choose to include
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s• How to report interest income on your tax Income from property given to a child.return if certain requirements are met. Use Formreturn. Property you give as a parent to your child under8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter-
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, theest and Dividends, for this purpose.In general, any interest that you receive or that Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,For more information about the tax on invest-is credited to your account and can be with- becomes the child’s property.ment income of children and the parents’ elec-drawn is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule Income from the property is taxable to thetion, see chapter 31.are discussed later in this chapter. child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal
You may be able to deduct expenses youBeneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest obligation to support the child is taxable to the
have in earning this income on Schedule Ayou receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trustparent or guardian having that legal obligation.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Seeis generally taxable income. You should receiveSavings account with parent as trustee.chapter 28. a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sInterest income from a savings account openedShare of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., fromfor a child who is a minor, but placed in the namethe fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itsUseful Items and subject to the order of the parents as trust-instructions will tell you where to report the in-ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of theYou may want to see: come on your Form 1040. state in which the child resides, both of the
following are true.Publication Social security number (SSN). You must
give your name and SSN to any person required❏ 537 Installment Sales 1. The savings account legally belongs to theby federal tax law to make a return, statement,
child.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses or other document that relates to you. This in-
cludes payers of interest. 2. The parents are not legally permitted to❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount
use any of the funds to support the child.Instruments SSN for joint account.If the funds in a joint
account belong to one person, list that person’s
Form (and Instructions) name first on the account and give that person’sForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generally
SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts, statement, by banks, savings and loans, andOrdinary Dividends later.) If the joint account contains combined other payers of interest. This form shows you the
❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and funds, give the SSN of the person whose name interest you received during the year. Keep this
Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Ais listed first on the account. form for your records. You do not have to attach
Filers These rules apply both to joint ownership by it to your tax return.
a married couple and to joint ownership by other Report on your tax return the total amount of❏ 3115 Application for Change in individuals. For example, if you open a joint interest income that you receive for the tax year.Accounting Method savings account with your child using funds be-Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Serieslonging to the child, list the child’s name first onEven if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds the account and give the child’s SSN. must still report all of your taxable interest in-Issued After 1989 Custodian account for your child.If your come. For example, you may receive distributive
❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record child is the actual owner of an account that is shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo-
Redemption of Series EE and I recorded in your name as custodian for the child, rations. This interest is reported to you on
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1
1989 you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of (Form 1120S).
Page 52 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 55 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives so-called “dividends” on deposits or on share ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or
interest as a nominee for you, that person will accounts in: more, gifts or services valued at more than $20
give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
• Cooperative banks,received on your behalf. mined by the cost to the financial institution.
• Credit unions,If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes
Example. You open a savings account atamounts belonging to another person, see the• Domestic building and loan associations,your local bank and deposit $800. The accountdiscussion on nominee distributions under How
• Domestic savings and loan associations,earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi-
culator. If no other interest is credited to yourcation 550, or see the Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)• Federal savings and loan associations,account during the year, the Form 1099-INT youor Schedule B (Form 1040) instructions. and receive will show $35 interest for the year. YouIncorrect amount. If you receive a Form • Mutual savings banks. must report $35 interest income on your tax1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or return.other incorrect information), you should ask the
Money market funds. Generally, amountsissuer for a corrected form. The new Form Interest on insurance dividends.Interest onyou receive from money market funds should be1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor- insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-reported as dividends, not as interest.rected.” surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited toForm 1099-OID. Reportable interest incomeCertificates of deposit and other deferredyour account. However, if you can withdraw itmay also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Originalinterest accounts.If you open any of theseonly on the anniversary date of the policy (orIssue Discount. For more information aboutaccounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervalsother specified date), the interest is taxable inamounts shown on this form, see Original Issueof 1 year or less during the term of the account.the year that date occurs.Discount (OID), later in this chapter. You generally must include this interest in your
income when you actually receive it or are enti-Prepaid insurance premiums.Any increaseExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest tled to receive it without paying a substantialin the value of prepaid insurance premiums,dividends you receive from a regulated invest-penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-advance premiums, or premium deposit funds isment company (mutual fund) are not included inture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a singleinterest if it is applied to the payment of premi-your taxable income. (However, see payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forums due on insurance policies or made avail-Information-reporting requirement, next.) You more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discountable for you to withdraw.will receive a notice from the mutual fund telling(OID), later.
you the amount of the exempt-interest dividends U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,Interest subject to penalty for early with-that you received. Exempt-interest dividends such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredare not shown on Form 1099-DIV or Form issued by any agency or instrumentality of theinterest account before maturity, you may have1099-INT. United States is taxable for federal income taxto pay a penalty. You must report the total
Information-reporting requirement.Al- purposes.amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-count during the year, without subtracting the
able, you must show them on your tax return if Interest on tax refunds.Interest you receivepenalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-
you have to file. This is an information-reporting on tax refunds is taxable income.ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more
requirement and does not change the information on how to report the interest andInterest on condemnation award.If the con-exempt-interest dividends into taxable income.deduct the penalty. demning authority pays you interest to compen-
Money borrowed to invest in certificate ofsate you for a delay in payment of an award, theNote. Exempt-interest dividends paid from
deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-interest is taxable.specified private activity bonds may be subject
rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetto the alternative minimum tax. See Alternative
Installment sale payments.If a contract forthe minimum deposit required for a certificate ofMinimum Tax in chapter 30 for more informa-
the sale or exchange of property provides fordeposit from the institution and the interest yoution. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains a
deferred payments, it also usually provides forearn on the certificate are two separate items.discussion on private activity bonds, under State
interest payable with the deferred payments.You must report the total interest you earn onor Local Government Obligations.
That interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifthe certificate in your income. If you itemize
Interest on VA dividends.Interest on insur- little or no interest is provided for in a deferreddeductions, you can deduct the interest you pay
ance dividends that you leave on deposit with payment contract, part of each payment may beas investment interest, up to the amount of your
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not treated as interest. See Unstated Interest andnet investment income. See Interest Expenses
taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, In-in chapter 3 of Publication 550.
on converted United States Government Life stallment Sales.
Insurance and on National Service Life Insur-Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
Interest on annuity contract.Accumulatedance policies. bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to
interest on an annuity contract you sell before itsmake up the $10,000 minimum deposit required
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). maturity date is taxable.to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2005, but you
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-received only $265, which represented the $575
generally do not include it in your income until est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asyou earned minus $310 interest charged on your
you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap- interest unless state law automatically changes$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form
ter 17. it to a payment on the principal.1099-INT for 2005 showing the $575 interest
you earned. The bank also gives you a state-Interest income on frozen deposits.Ex-ment showing that you paid $310 interest forclude from your gross income interest on frozen2005. You must include the $575 in your in-deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of thecome. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-Taxable Interest year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectposit because:to the net investment income limit.Taxable interest includes interest you receive
from bank accounts, loans you make to others, 1. The financial institution is bankrupt or in-Gift for opening account.If you receive non-and other sources. The following are some other solvent, orcash gifts or services for making deposits or forsources of taxable interest.
opening an account in a savings institution, you 2. The state where the institution is located
Dividends that are actually interest.Certain may have to report the value as interest. has placed limits on withdrawals because
distributions commonly called dividends are ac- For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or other financial institutions in the state are
tually interest. You must report as interestservices valued at more than $10 must be re- bankrupt or insolvent.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 53

Page 56 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The amount of interest you must exclude is Or, on the Internet, visit: through November 1965 and all of 1975
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/sav/ matured in 2005. If you have used methodthe interest that was credited on the frozen de-
sav.htm 1, you generally must report the interest onposits minus the sum of:
these bonds on your 2005 return.Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-1. The net amount you withdrew from these 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increasecrual method of accounting, you must reportdeposits during the year, and in redemption value as interest each year.interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it
2. The amount you could have withdrawn asaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestYou must use the same method for all series EE,of the end of the year (not reduced by anyuntil you receive it or until the bonds mature.series E, and series I bonds you own. If you dopenalty for premature withdrawals of aAccrual methods of accounting are explained innot choose method 2 by reporting the increasetime deposit). chapter 1 under Accounting Methods. in redemption value as interest each year, you
If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- must use method 1.Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash
come on deposits that were frozen at the end ofmethod of accounting, as most individual tax- If you plan to cash your bonds in the2005, see Frozen deposits under How To Re- payers do, you generally report the interest on same year that you will pay for higherport Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The education expenses, you may want to
TIP
cash method of accounting is explained in chap-550, for information about reporting this interest use method 1 because you may be able toter 1 under Accounting Methods.income exclusion on your tax return. exclude the interest from your income. To learn
The interest you exclude is treated asSeries HH Bonds.  These bonds were issuedhow, see Education Savings Bond Program,
credited to your account in the following year.at face value. Interest is paid twice a year bylater.
You must include it in income in the year you candirect deposit to your bank account. If you are aChange from method 1. If you want towithdraw it. cash method taxpayer, you must report interestchange your method of reporting the intereston these bonds as income in the year you re-from method 1 to method 2, you can do soExample. $100 of interest was credited onceive it. without permission from the IRS. In the year ofyour frozen deposit during the year. You with-Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;change you must report all interest accrued todrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofthey were last offered in August 2004. Beforedate and not previously reported for all yourthe end of the year. You must include $80 in1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H
bonds.your income and exclude $20 from your incomebonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest eachIf you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustfor the year. You must include the $20 in your
year, you must continue to do so for all seriesreport the interest when you receive it.income for the year you can withdraw it.
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forSeries H bonds have a maturity period of 30
any you get later, unless you request permissionyears. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond at a
to change, as explained next.discount when interest has been defaulted orSeries EE and series I bonds.Interest on
when the interest has accrued but has not been Change from method 2. To change fromthese bonds is payable when you redeem the
paid, the transaction is described as trading a method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-bonds. The difference between the purchase
bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not sion from the IRS. Permission for the change isprice and the redemption value is taxable inter-
income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. automatically granted if you send the IRS aest.
When you receive a payment of that interest, it is statement that meets all the following require-Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds werea return of capital that reduces the remaining ments. first offered in July 1980. They have a maturitycost basis of your bond. Interest that accruesperiod of 30 years. 1. You have typed or printed at the top:after the date of purchase, however, is taxable
“Change in Method of Accounting UnderBefore July 1980, series E bonds were is-interest income for the year it is received or
Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.sued. The original 10-year maturity period ofaccrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest
2002-9 (or later update).”series E bonds has been extended to 40 yearsDates, later, for more information.
for bonds issued before December 1965 and 302. It includes your name and social securityyears for bonds issued after November 1965.Below-market loans. In general, a number under the label in (1).Paper series EE and series E bonds are issuedbelow-market loan is a loan on which no interest
3. It identifies the savings bonds for whichat a discount. The face value is payable to you atis charged or on which interest is charged at a
maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issuedyou are requesting this change.rate below the applicable federal rate. Seeat their face value. The face value plus accruedBelow-Market Loans in chapter 1 of Publication 4. It includes your agreement to:interest is payable to you at maturity.550 for more information.  Beginning in 2005, owners of paper seriesa. Report all interest on any bonds ac-
EE bonds are able to convert them to electronicquired during or after the year ofU.S. Savings Bonds bonds. These converted bonds do not retain the change when the interest is realized
denomination listed on the paper certificate butupon disposition, redemption, or finalThis section provides tax information on U.S.are posted at their purchase price (with accruedmaturity, whichever is earliest, andsavings bonds. It explains how to report theinterest).
interest income on these bonds and how to treat b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
Series I bonds. Series I bonds were firsttransfers of these bonds. quired before the year of change whenoffered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed the interest is realized upon disposition,For other information on U.S. savingsbonds issued at their face amount with a matur-redemption, or final maturity, whicheverbonds, write to: ity period of 30 years. The face value plus allis earliest, with the exception of the in-accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.terest reported in prior tax years.For series EE and I: Reporting options for cash method tax-Bureau of the Public Debt 5. It includes your signature.payers. If you use the cash method of report-Accrual Services Division ing income, you can report the interest on seriesYou must attach this statement to your tax re-P.O. Box 1328 EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of theturn for the year of change, which you must fileParkersburg, WV 26106-1328 following ways. by the due date (including extensions).
For series HH/H: You can have an automatic extension of 61. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest
Bureau of the Public Debt months from the due date of your return for theuntil the earlier of the year you cash or
Current Income Services Division year of change (excluding extensions) to file thedispose of the bonds or the year they ma-
HH/H Assistance Branch statement with an amended return. At the top ofture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,
P.O. Box 2186 the statement, enter “Filed pursuant to sectionlater.)
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186 Note. Series E bonds issued in January 301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you must
Page 54 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 57 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pone reporting interest on the bond. You laterTable 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one
in your name and one in your spouse’s name. AtIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
that time neither you nor your spouse has toyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. report the interest earned to the date of reissue.another person as co-owners, using only your
own funds Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE
savings bond entirely with your own funds. Theyou buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.
bond was issued to you and your spouse aswho is the sole owner of the bond
co-owners. You both postpone reporting interestyou and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportionon the bond. You later have the bond reissuedco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one inpurchase price your spouse’s name. You must report half the
interest earned to the date of reissue.you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate
property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
property report one-half of the interest. Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, series
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must
include in your income for that year the interesthave filed your original return for the year ofCommunity property. If you and your
earned to the date of transfer if you have notspouse live in a community property state andchange by the due date (including extensions).
already reported it. However, if you are consid-hold bonds as community property, one-half ofBy the date you file the original state- ered the owner of the trust and if the increase inthe interest is considered received by each ofment with your return, you must also value both before and after the transfer contin-you. If you file separate returns, each of yousend a copy to the address below.
ues to be taxable to you, you can continue togenerally must report one-half of the bond inter-
defer reporting the interest earned each year.est. For more information about communityInternal Revenue Service You must include the total interest in your in-property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings come in the year you cash or dispose of theerty.
Branch) bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,Table 7-1. These rules are also shown inP.O. Box 7604 whichever is earlier.Table 7-1.Benjamin Franklin Station The same rules apply to previously unre-Washington, DC 20044 ported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifOwnership transferred.If you bought seriesIf you use a private delivery service, send the the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH orE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourcopy to the address below. series H bonds you acquired in a trade for theown funds and had them reissued in your series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bondsco-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,Internal Revenue Service traded, later.you must include in your gross income for theAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsyear of reissue all interest that you earned onDecedents. The manner of reporting interestBranch) these bonds and have not previously reported.income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,1111 Constitution Avenue, NW But, if the bonds were reissued in your nameafter the death of the owner, depends on theRoom 4516 alone, you do not have to report the interestaccounting and income-reporting method previ-Washington, DC 20224 accrued at that time. ously used by the decedent. This is explained inThis same rule applies when bonds (otherchapter 1 of Publication 550.than bonds held as community property) areInstead of filing this statement, you can re-
transferred between spouses or incident to di-quest permission to change from method 2 to Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-vorce.method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, porting the interest on your series EE or series E
follow the form instructions for an automatic bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomePurchased jointly.If you and a co-owner
change. No user fee is required. when you traded the bonds for series HH oreach contributed funds to buy series E, series
series H bonds, unless you received cash in theEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,
the names of co-owners, such as you and your ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-you must include in your gross income for the
child or you and your spouse, interest on the not trade any other series of bonds for series HHyear of reissue your share of all the interest
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who bonds.) Any cash you received is income up toearned on the bonds that you have not previ-
bought the bond. the amount of the interest earned on the bondsously reported. The former co-owner does not
traded. When your series HH or series H bondshave to include in gross income at the time ofOne co-owner’s funds used.  If you used mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-reissue his or her share of the interest earnedyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax ity, you report as interest the difference betweenthat was not reported before the transfer. Thison the interest. This is true even if you let the their redemption value and your cost. Your costinterest, however, as well as all interest earnedother co-owner redeem the bond and keep all is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedafter the reissue, is income to the formerthe proceeds. Under these circumstances, since series EE or series E bonds plus any amountco-owner.the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INT you had to pay at the time of the trade.This income-reporting rule also applies whenat the time of redemption, the other co-ownerthe bonds are reissued in the name of yourmust provide you with another Form 1099-INT Example.  In 2004, you traded series EEformer co-owner and a new co-owner. But theshowing the amount of interest from the bond bonds (on which you postponed reporting thenew co-owner will report only his or her share ofthat is taxable to you. The co-owner who re- interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223the interest earned after the transfer.deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in-If bonds that you and a co-owner boughtdistributions under How To Report Interest In- come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the timejointly are reissued to each of you separately income  in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more of the trade, the series EE bonds had accruedthe same proportion as your contribution to theinformation about how a person who is a nomi- interest of $523 and a redemption value ofpurchase price, neither you nor your co-ownernee reports interest income belonging to an- $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-has to report at that time the interest earnedother person. turity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportbefore the bonds were reissued.
Both co-owners’ funds used. If you and $300 as interest income in the year of maturity.
the other co-owner each contribute part of the This is the difference between their redemptionExample 1. You and your spouse each
bond’s purchase price, the interest is generally value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (thespent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series
taxable to each of you, in proportion to the amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It isEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you
amount each of you paid. also the difference between the accrued interestand your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 55

Page 58 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 c. Employer-provided educational assis-Education Savings tance.cash received on the trade.)
Bond ProgramChoice to report interest in year of trade. 4. Any expense used in figuring the HopeYou could have chosen to treat all of the previ-You may be able to exclude from income all orand lifetime learning credits.ously unreported accrued interest on the seriespart of the interest you receive on the redemp-
EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bondstion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theAmount excludable. If the total proceeds
as income in the year of the trade. If you madeyear if you pay qualified higher educational ex-(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.
this choice, it is treated as a change from penses during the same year. This exclusion issavings bonds you redeem during the year are
known as the Education Savings Bond Program.method 1. See Change from method 1 under not more than your adjusted qualified higher
You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourSeries EE and series I bonds, earlier. educational expenses for the year, you may be
filing status is married filing separately.able to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds
are more than the expenses, you may be able toForm 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure yourForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter- exclude only part of the interest.exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 orest. When you cash a bond, the bank or other
To determine the excludable amount, multi-Form 1040A.payer that redeems it must give you a Form ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.1099-INT if the interest part of the payment youQualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualifiedThe numerator (top part) of the fraction is thereceive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your FormU.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedqualified higher educational expenses you paid1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must beduring the year. The denominator (bottom part)ence between the amount you received and theissued either in your name (sole owner) or inof the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedyour and your spouse’s names (co-owners).amount paid for the bond. However, your Form during the year.You must be at least 24 years old before the1099-INT may show more interest than you
bond’s issue date. For example, a bond boughthave to include on your income tax return. For Example. In February 2005, Mark andby a parent and issued in the name of his or herexample, this may happen if any of the following Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-are true. ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in Aprilsion by the parent or child. 1996. They received proceeds of $7,068, repre-• You chose to report the increase in the The issue date of a bond may be senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofredemption value of the bond each year. earlier than the date the bond is pur-$2,068. In 2005, they paid $4,000 of theirThe interest shown on your Form chased because the issue date as-daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingCAUTION
!
1099-INT will not be reduced by amountssigned to a bond is the first day of the month inan education credit for that amount, and their
previously included in income. which it is purchased. daughter does not have any tax-free educational
assistance. They can exclude $1,170 ($2,068 ×• You received the bond from a decedent.Beneficiary.You can designate any individual($4,000 ÷ $7,068)) of interest in 2005. TheyThe interest shown on your Form (including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.must pay tax on the remaining $898 ($2,068 −1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-
$1,170) interest.Verification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-est reported by the decedent before death,
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-or on the decedent’s final return, or by the Modified adjusted gross income limit.
tion information from the Department of theestate on the estate’s income tax return. The interest exclusion is limited if your modified
Treasury. adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:• Ownership of the bond was transferred.
Qualified expenses.Qualified higher edu-The interest shown on your Form • $61,200 to $76,200 for taxpayers filing sin-cational expenses are tuition and fees required1099-INT will not be reduced by interest gle or head of household, andfor you, your spouse, or your dependent (forthat accrued before the transfer. • $91,850 to $121,850 for married taxpayerswhom you can claim an exemption) to attend an
• You were named as a co-owner and the filing jointly or for a qualifying widow(er)eligible educational institution.
other co-owner contributed funds to buy Qualified expenses include any contribution with dependent child.
the bond. The interest shown on your you make to a qualified tuition program or to aYou do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifCoverdell education savings account.Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the your modified AGI is equal to or more than theQualified expenses do not include expensesamount you received as nominee for the upper limit for your filing status.for room and board or for courses involvingother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of aModified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion,this chapter, for more information about
degree or certificate granting program. is adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21the reporting requirements.)
or Form 1040, line 37) figured before the interestEligible educational institutions.These• You received the bond in a taxable distri- exclusion, and modified by adding back any:institutions include most public, private, andbution from a retirement or profit-sharing
nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalplan. The interest shown on your Form 1. Foreign earned income exclusion,schools that are accredited and are eligible to1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- 2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,participate in student aid programs run by theest portion of the amount taxable as aDepartment of Education. 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentsdistribution from the plan and not taxable
of American Samoa,Reduction for certain benefits.You mustas interest. (This amount is generally
reduce your qualified higher educational ex-shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions 4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-under an employer’s adoption assistanceContracts, etc., for the year of distribution.)ships (see Scholarships and fellowships in program,
chapter 12), andFor more information on including the correct 6. Deduction for tuition and fees,
2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-amount of interest on your return, see How To 7. Deduction for student loan interest, andtion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.Report Interest Income, later. Publication 550
includes examples showing how to report these 8. Deduction for domestic production activi-3. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or
amounts. ties.inheritances) received for educational ex-
penses, such as:Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
empt from state and local taxes. The 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youa. Veterans’ educational assistance bene-Form 1099-INT you receive will indi- claim any of the exclusion or deduction items
TIP
fits,cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the
amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptinterest in box 3. b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
Page 56 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 59 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any deduction for tuition and fees, student loanTreasury inflation-protected securitiesment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a est to taxable interest.interest, or domestic production activities) to the
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountamount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the
that is adjusted to take into account inflation andtotal on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. Original Issuedeflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-If you have investment interest expense in-
Discount (OID)ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instrumentscurred to earn royalties and other investment
under Original Issue Discount (OID), in Publica-income, see Education Savings Bond Program Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-tion 550.in chapter 1 of Publication 550. est. You generally include OID in your income as
Recordkeeping. If you claim the in- it accrues over the term of the debt instrument,Bonds Sold Betweenterest exclusion, you must keep a whether or not you receive any payments from
written record of the qualified U.S. the issuer.Interest DatesRECORDS
savings bonds you redeem. Your record must A debt instrument generally has OID when
include the serial number, issue date, faceIf you sell a bond between interest paymentthe instrument is issued for a price that is less
dates, part of the sales price represents interestvalue, and total redemption proceeds (principal than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID
accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatand interest) of each bond. You can use Form is the difference between the stated redemption
part of the sales price as interest income for the8818, Optional Form To Record Redemption of price at maturity and the issue price.
year of sale.Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued All debt instruments that pay no interest
If you buy a bond between interest paymentAfter 1989, to record this information. You before maturity are presumed to be issued at a
dates, part of the purchase price representsshould also keep bills, receipts, canceled discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example
interest accrued before the date of purchase.checks, or other documentation that shows you of these instruments.
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as apaid qualified higher educational expenses dur- The OID accrual rules generally do not applyreturn of your capital investment, rather thaning the year. to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-interest income, by reducing your basis in theturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).bond. See Accrued interest on bonds under See Discount on Short-Term Obligations inU.S. Treasury Bills, How To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 ofchapter 1 of Publication 550.Publication 550 for information on reporting theNotes, and Bonds
payment. De minimis OID. You can treat the discount asTreasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of(obligations) of the U.S. Government. the stated redemption price at maturity multi-Insurance
plied by the number of full years from the date of
Taxation of interest.Interest income from Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-original issue to maturity. This small discount is
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject tociary of the insured person are usually not tax-known as “de minimis” OID.
federal income tax, but is exempt from all stateable. But if you receive the proceeds in
and local income taxes. You should receiveinstallments, you must usually report a part ofExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interesteach installment payment as interest income.a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,
(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.For more information about insurance pro-issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of
ceeds received in installments, see Publication1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10Payments of principal and interest generally
525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. (the number of full years from the date of originalwill be credited to your designated checking or
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20savings account by direct deposit through the
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asTREASURY DIRECT system.
ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willTreasury bills.These bills generally have aceive are taxed as pension and annuity incomerecognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.They are issued at a discount in the amount ofSee chapter 10 for information on pension andExample 2. The facts are the same as in$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The differenceannuity income from nonqualified plans. Example 1, except that the bond was issued at
between the discounted price you pay for the $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount
bills and the face value you receive at maturity is is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youState or Localinterest income. Generally, you report this inter- must include the OID in income as it accrues
est income when the bill is paid at maturity.Government Obligations over the term of the bond.
Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury Debt instrument bought after original is-Interest on a bond used to finance governmentnotes have maturity periods of more than 1 year, sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deoperations generally is not taxable if the bond isranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods for minimis OID at a premium, the discount is notissued by a state, the District of Columbia, aTreasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Both includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentpossession of the United States, or any of theirnotes and bonds generally pay interest every 6 with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountpolitical subdivisions.months. Generally, you report this interest for is reported under the market discount rules. SeeBonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribalthe year paid. For more information, see U.S. Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica-government are treated as issued by a state.Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 of tion 550.Interest on these bonds is generally tax exemptPublication 550. if the bonds are part of an issue of which sub-
Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rulesstantially all of the proceeds are to be used in theFor other information on Treasury discussed in this chapter do not apply to theexercise of any essential government function.notes or bonds, write to: following debt instruments. Interest on arbitrage bonds issued by state
or local governments after October 9, 1969, is1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seetaxable.Treasury Direct Stripped tax-exempt obligations underInterest on a private activity bond that is not aAttn: Customer Information Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1qualified bond is taxable. For more informationP.O. Box 9150 of Publication 550).on whether such interest is taxable or tax ex-Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150
empt, see State or Local Government Obliga-2. U.S. savings bonds.Or, on the Internet, visit: tions in chapter 1 of Publication 550. 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with awww. publicdebt.treas.gov
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearInformation reporting requirement.If you from the date of issue).For information on series EE, series I, andmust file a tax return, you are required to show
series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings any tax-exempt interest you received on your 4. Obligations issued by an individual before
Bonds, earlier. return. This is an information-reporting require- March 2, 1984.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Page 60 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- This also applies to similar deposit arrange-• Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
ing are true. draw the earnings, orments with banks, building and loan associa-
tions, etc., including: • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessa. The lender is not in the business of
the interest you are to receive on an early• Time deposits,lending money.
withdrawal or redemption is substantially• Bonus plans,b. The amount of the loan, plus the less than the interest payable at maturity.
amount of any outstanding prior loans• Savings certificates,between the same individuals, is
Accrual method. If you use an accrual• Deferred income certificates,$10,000 or less.
method, you report your interest income when• Bonus savings certificates, andc. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of you earn it, whether or not you have received it.
the principal purposes of the loan. Interest is earned over the term of the debt• Growth savings certificates.
instrument.
Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru- Example. If, in the previous example, youally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs arement (or your broker, if you held the instrument use an accrual method, you must include theCDs that are not in registered form. They are notthrough a broker) should give you Form interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldissued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar report the interest as follows: 2003, $80; 2004,able from one individual to another.statement, if the total OID for the calendar year $249.60; and 2005, $179.20.Banks must provide the IRS and the personis $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in box
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.1, the amount of OID for the part of the year that Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is
you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, the taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andMore information.See chapter 1 of Publica-stated interest that you must include in your payable. It does not matter when you mail thetion 550 for more information about OID andincome. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent to coupon for payment.related topics, such as market discount bonds.the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.
Keep it for your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as How To Reportinterest income. But see Refiguring OID shown When To Reporton Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, for Interest Incomemore information. Interest Income
Generally, you report all of your taxable interestForm 1099-OID not received.If you had OID When to report your interest income depends onincome on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, linefor the year but did not receive a Form whether you use the cash method or an accrual8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.1099-OID, see Publication 1212, which lists totalmethod to report income. You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestOID on certain debt instruments and has infor-
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you mustmation that will help you figure OID. If your debt
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers useuse Form 1040A or Form 1040.instrument is not listed in Publication 1212, con-
the cash method. If you use this method, yousult the issuer for further information about the Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1generally report your interest income in the yearaccrued OID for the year. (Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A andin which you actually or constructively receive it.
Nominee. If someone else is the holder of any of the following are true.However, there are special rules for reporting
record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-the discount on certain debt instruments. See• Your taxable interest income is more thanment that belongs to you and receives a FormU.S. Savings Bonds and Original Issue Dis- $1,500.1099-OID on your behalf, that person must givecount, earlier.
you a Form 1099-OID. • You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-Example. On September 1, 2003, youRefiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. gram (discussed earlier).loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxpounded annually. You are not in the business• You received interest from a seller-fi-6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingof lending money. The note stated that principalnanced mortgage, and the buyer used theapply. and interest would be due on August 31, 2005.property as a home.In 2005, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-• You bought the debt instrument after its
• You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex-pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashoriginal issue and paid a premium or an
empt interest.method, you must include in income on youracquisition premium.
2005 return the $508.80 interest you received in• You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.• The debt instrument is a stripped bond orthat year. savings bond interest that includesa stripped coupon (including certain zero
amounts you reported before 2005.Constructive receipt.You constructivelycoupon instruments).
receive income when it is credited to your ac-• You received, as a nominee, interest thatFor information about figuring the correctcount or made available to you. You do not needactually belongs to someone else.amount of OID to include in your income, seeto have physical possession of it. For example,Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments in • You received a Form 1099-INT for interestyou are considered to receive interest, divi-Publication 1212. on frozen deposits.dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarList each payer’s name and the amount of inter-Refiguring periodic interest shown on Formfinancial institution, or interest on life insuranceest income received from each payer on line 1. If1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentpolicy dividends left to accumulate, when theyyou received a Form 1099-INT or Formor acquired it from another holder during theare credited to your account and subject to your1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yetage firm as the payer.earlier, for information about the treatment ofentered in your passbook.periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of You cannot use Form 1040A if you must useYou constructively receive income on theForm 1099-OID for that instrument. Form 1040, as described next.deposit or account even if you must:
Certificates of deposit (CDs).If you buy a Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead• Make withdrawals in multiples of evenCD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:amounts,include in income each year a part of the total
• Give a notice to withdraw before makinginterest due and report it in the same manner as 1. You forfeited interest income because of
the withdrawal,other OID. the early withdrawal of a time deposit,
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 61 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. You received or paid accrued interest on• You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. the amount shown in box 3 was previously in-
securities transferred between interest cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savingssavings bond interest that includes
payment dates, bond interest previously reported, later.amounts you reported before 2005.
Box 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income tax3. You had a financial account in a foreign• You received, as a nominee, interest thatwithheld) will contain an amount if you werecountry, unless the combined value of allactually belongs to someone else. subject to backup withholding. Report theforeign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-• You received a Form 1099-INT for interestamount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, oning all of 2005 or the accounts were withon frozen deposits. Form 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 64certain U.S. military banking facilities, (federal income tax withheld).• You received a Form 1099-INT for interest4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investmenton a bond that you bought between inter-and choose to reduce interest income from expenses you may be able to deduct as anest payment dates.the bonds by any amortizable bond pre- itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of Publication
mium (see Bond Premium Amortization in • Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is550 for more information about investment ex-
chapter 3 of Publication 550), true. penses.
5. You are reporting OID in an amount moreOn Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and theU.S. savings bond interest previously
or less than the amount shown on Formamount received from each. If you received areported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for
1099-OID, or Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.interest you do not have to report. See Form6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-
1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest, ear-vate activity bonds issued after August 7,
Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,lier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.1986.
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andOn Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, or
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formon Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,Schedule B. You must complete Schedule
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxablereport all the interest shown on your FormB (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and
interest income you received. You must report1099-INT. Then follow these steps.any of the following apply.
all of your taxable interest income even if you do• Your taxable interest income is more than 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotalnot receive a Form 1099-INT.$1,500. of all interest listed on line 1.If you forfeited interest income because of
• You are claiming the interest exclusionthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savingsunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-ductible amount will be shown on Form Bond Interest Previously Reported” andgram (discussed earlier). 1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with- enter amounts previously reported or inter-
drawal of savings in chapter 1 of Publication est accrued before you received the bond.• You had a foreign account or you received
550.a distribution from, or were a grantor of, or 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotalBox 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amounttransferor to, a foreign trust. and enter the result on line 2.of interest income you received from U.S. sav-• You received interest from a seller-fi-ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andnanced mortgage, and the buyer used theTreasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3More information. For more informationproperty as a home. to any other taxable interest income you re-about how to report interest income, see chapter
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was• You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex- 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the
empt interest. previously included in interest income. If part of form you must file.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form
1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showGeneral Information you the distributions you received from them
8. during the year. Keep this form with your rec-This section discusses general rules for divi-
ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxdend income.
return.
Tax on investment income of a child under Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.age 14. Part of a child’s 2005 investment in-Dividends and Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. Thismust still report all of your taxable dividend in-may happen if all of the following are true.come. For example, you may receive distributiveOther Corporate shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-
chapter S corporations. These dividends are1. The child was under age 14 at the end of
Distributions reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)2005. A child born on January 1, 1992, is
and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).considered to be age 14 at the end of
2005. Reporting tax withheld.If tax is withheld
from your dividend income, the payer must give2. The child had more than $1,600 of invest-Reminder you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amountment income (such as taxable interest and
withheld.dividends) and has to file a tax return.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2005.dividend income from sources outside the
tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveUnited States (foreign income), you must reportIf all of these statements are true, Form 8615,you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-that income on your tax return unless it is ex-Tax for Children Under Age 14 With Investmenttions received on your behalf.empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-Income of More Than $1,600, must be com-side inside or outside the United States andpleted and attached to the child’s tax return. Ifwhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-any of these statements is not true, Form 8615 isforeign payer. ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestnot required and the child’s income is taxed atthat are received by a broker on your behalfhis or her own tax rate. must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,However, the parent can choose to includeMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’sSee Reporting Substitute Payments under Shortreturn if certain requirements are met. Use FormIntroduction Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for more8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter-information about reporting these payments.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of:est and Dividends, for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on invest-• Ordinary dividends, Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.Ifment income of children and the parents’ elec-
you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrecttion, see chapter 31.• Capital gain distributions,
amount (or other incorrect information), you
• Nondividend distributions, and Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Dividends should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The
and other distributions you receive as a benefi-new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-• Other distributions you may receive from aciary of an estate or trust are generally taxablerected.”corporation or a mutual fund. income. You should receive a Schedule K-1
(Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share of Income,Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,This chapter also explains how to report divi-
Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after adend income on your tax return.
Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructionsdividend is declared, but before it is paid, the  Dividends are distributions of money, stock,will tell you where to report the income on yourowner of record (usually the payee shown on theor other property paid to you by a corporation.Form 1040. dividend check) must include the dividend inYou also may receive dividends through a part- income.nership, an estate, a trust, or an association thatSocial security number (SSN). You must
is taxed as a corporation. However, some give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayer
Dividends received in January.If a regu-amounts you receive that are called dividendsidentification number (ITIN)) to any person re-
lated investment company (mutual fund) or realare actually interest income. (See Dividends thatquired by federal tax law to make a return, state-
estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-are actually interest under Taxable Interest in ment, or other document that relates to you. This
dend (including any exempt-interest dividend orchapter 7.) includes payers of dividends. If you do not give
capital gain distribution) in October, November,your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, youMost distributions are paid in cash (or or December payable to shareholders of recordmay have to pay a penalty.check). However, distributions can consist of on a date in one of those months but actuallyFor more information on SSNs and ITINs,more stock, stock rights, other property, or serv- pays the dividend during January of the nextsee Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7.ices. calendar year, you are considered to have re-
Backup withholding. Your dividend income ceived the dividend on December 31. You report
Useful Items is generally not subject to regular withholding.the dividend in the year it was declared.
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-You may want to see:
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the
income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofPublication
dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofOrdinary Dividends❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individualsthe amount you are paid.
Backup withholding may also be required if❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-mon type of distribution from a corporation. They❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions mined that you underreported your interest orare paid out of the earnings and profits of adividend income. For more information, seecorporation and are ordinary income to you. ThisForm (and Instructions) Backup Withholding in chapter 4. means they are not capital gains. You can as-❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and sume that any dividend you receive on commonStock certificate in two or more names.IfOrdinary Dividends or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlesstwo or more persons hold stock as joint tenants,
the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,
nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of theOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A each person’s share of any dividends from the
Form 1099-DIV you receive.Filers stock is determined by local law.
Page 60 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 63 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
121-day period (from July 8, 2005, through Sep-Dividends that are not qualified dividends.Qualified Dividends tember 6, 2005). The following dividends are not qualified divi-
dends. They are not qualified dividends even ifQualified dividends are the ordinary dividendsExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofthey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.that are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi-ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 30,mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain.2005. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of• Capital gain distributions.They should be shown in box 1b of the Form10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July1099-DIV you receive. • Dividends paid on deposits with mutual8, 2005. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you thatQualified dividends are subject to the 15% savings banks, cooperative banks, creditthe portion of the dividend eligible to be treatedrate if the regular tax rate that would apply is unions, U.S. building and loan associa-as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per share.25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual Fundapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are federal savings and loan associations, andshows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 andsubject to the 5% rate. similar financial institutions. (Report thesequalified dividends of $200. However, you soldTo qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate, amounts as interest income.)the 10,000 shares on August 3, 2005. You haveall of the following requirements must be met.no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Fund• Dividends from a corporation that is a
because you held the ABC Mutual Fund stock tax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop-1. The dividends must have been paid by afor less than 61 days. erative during the corporation’s tax year inU.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-
which the dividends were paid or duringporation. (See Qualified foreign corpora- Holding period reduced where risk of loss the corporation’s previous tax year.tion later.) is diminished. When determining whether
you met the minimum holding period discussed• Dividends paid by a corporation on em-2. The dividends are not of the type listedearlier, you cannot count any day during whichployer securities which are held on thelater under Dividends that are not qualifiedyou meet any of the following conditions. date of record by an employee stock own-dividends.
ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that
3. You meet the holding period (discussed1. You had an option to sell, were under a corporation.
next). contractual obligation to sell, or had made• Dividends on any share of stock to the(and not closed) a short sale of substan-extent that you are obligated (whethertially identical stock or securities. under a short sale or otherwise) to makeHolding period.You must have held the stock2. You were grantor (writer) of an option torelated payments for positions in substan-for more than 60 days during the 121-day periodbuy substantially identical stock or securi-tially similar or related property.that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.ties.The ex-dividend date is the first date following • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if
the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingyou know or have reason to know that the
of a stock will not receive the next dividendone or more other positions in substantiallypayments are not qualified dividends.
payment. Instead, the seller will get the divi-similar or related property. • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxdend. For information about how to apply condition1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentWhen counting the number of days you held(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5. you know or have reason to know the pay-the stock, include the day you disposed the ments are not qualified dividends.stock, but not the day you acquired it. See the
Qualified foreign corporation.A foreign cor-examples later.
poration is a qualified foreign corporation if itException for preferred stock.In the case Table 8-1. Income Tax Treatiesmeets any of the following conditions. of preferred stock, you must have held the stock
more than 90 days during the 181-day period Income tax treaties that the United States1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.has with the following countries satisfythat begins 90 days before the ex-dividend datepossession. requirement (2) under Qualified foreignif the dividends are due to periods totaling more
corporation.than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits
to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- of a comprehensive income tax treaty with
ing period in the previous paragraph applies. the United States that the Treasury De-Australia Ireland Romaniapartment determines is satisfactory for thisAustria Israel RussianExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares of purpose and that includes an exchange ofBelgium Italy FederationXYZ Corp. common stock on June 30, 2005. information program. For a list of thoseCanada Jamaica SlovakXYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents pertreaties, seeTable 8-1. China Japan Republicshare. The ex-dividend date was July 8, 2005.3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)Cyprus Kazakhstan SloveniaYour Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows above, but the stock for which the dividendCzech Korea South Africa$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxis paid is readily tradable on an estab-Republic Latvia Spain1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold thelished securities market in the UnitedDenmark Lithuania Sweden5,000 shares on August 3, 2005. You held yourStates. See Readily tradable stock, later. Egypt Luxembourg Switzerlandshares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the
Estonia Mexico Thailand121-day period (from July 1, 2005, through Au-Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedFinland Morocco Trinidad andgust 3, 2005). The 121-day period began onforeign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-France Netherlands TobagoMay 9, 2005 (60 days before the ex-dividendvestment company during its tax year in whichGermany New Zealand Tunisiadate), and ended on September 6, 2005. Youthe dividends are paid or during its previous taxGreece Norway Turkeyhave no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-year. Hungary Pakistan Ukrainecause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61
Readily tradable stock.Any stock (such asdays. Iceland Philippines United
common, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) orIndia Poland Kingdom
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in an American depositary receipt in respect of thatIndonesia Portugal Venezuela
Example 1 except that you bought the stock on stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if
July 7, 2005 (the day before the ex-dividend it is listed on one of the following securities
date), and you sold the stock on September 8, markets: the New York Stock Exchange, the
Dividends Used to Buy2005. You held the stock for 63 days (from July NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-
8, 2005, through September 8, 2005). The $500 change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-
More Stock
of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of yournati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock
Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be- Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, or The corporation in which you own stock may
cause you held the stock for 61 days of the the Pacific Exchange, Inc. have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate DistributionsPage 61

Page 64 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Additional information.For more informationlets you choose to use your dividends to buy 1. You or any other shareholder has theon the treatment of distributions from mutual(through an agent) more shares of stock in the choice to receive cash or other propertyfunds, see Publication 564.corporation instead of receiving the dividends in instead of stock or stock rights.cash. If you are a member of this type of plan
2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-and you use your dividends to buy more stock at
erty to some shareholders and an increasea price equal to its fair market value, you still
in the percentage interest in theNondividendmust report the dividends as income.
corporation’s assets or earnings and prof-If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
its to other shareholders.Distributionsment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price
less than its fair market value, you must report 3. The distribution is in convertible preferredA nondividend distribution is a distribution that isas dividend income the fair market value of the stock and has the same result as in (2).not paid out of the earnings and profits of aadditional stock on the dividend payment date. 4. The distribution gives preferred stock tocorporation. You should receive a FormYou also must report as dividend income any some common stock shareholders and1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-service charge subtracted from your cash divi- common stock to other common stocktion showing the nondividend distribution. Ondends before the dividends are used to buy the shareholders.Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution willadditional stock. But you may be able to deductbe shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thethe service charge. See chapter 28 for morestatement, you report the distribution as an ordi-distribution, however, is not taxable if it isinformation about deducting expenses of pro-nary dividend. an increase in the conversion ratio of con-ducing income. vertible preferred stock made solely to takeBasis adjustment.A nondividend distributionIn some dividend reinvestment plans, you into account a stock dividend, stock split,reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedcan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a or similar event that would otherwise resultuntil your basis in the stock is fully recovered.price less than fair market value. If you choose in reducing the conversion right.)This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofto do this, you must report as dividend incomecapital. It is a return of your investment in theThe term “stock” includes rights to acquirethe difference between the cash you invest andstock of the company. If you buy stock in astock, and the term “shareholder” includes athe fair market value of the stock you buy. Whencorporation in different lots at different times,holder of rights or of convertible securities.figuring this amount, use the fair market value ofand you cannot definitely identify the sharesIf you receive taxable stock dividends orthe stock on the dividend payment date. subject to the nondividend distribution, reducestock rights, include their fair market value at the
the basis of your earliest purchases first.time of the distribution in your income.
When the basis of your stock has been re-Money Market Funds Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.duced to zero, report any additional nondividendIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptiondistribution that you receive as a capital gain.Report amounts you receive from money market price higher than its issue price, the differenceWhether you report it as a long-term orfunds as dividend income. Money market funds (the redemption premium) generally is taxableshort-term capital gain depends on how longare a type of mutual fund and should not be as a constructive distribution of additional stockyou have held the stock. See Holding Period inconfused with bank money market accounts that on the preferred stock. For more information,chapter 14.pay interest. see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Example. You bought stock in 1993 for Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-$100. In 1996, you received a nondividend dis-ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair markettribution of $80. You did not include this amountvalue when distributed. If you receive stock orCapital Gain in your income, but you reduced the basis ofstock rights that are not taxable to you, seeyour stock to $20. You received a nondividendStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentdistribution of $30 in 2005. The first $20 of thisDistributions Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportmation on how to figure their basis.the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for    Capital gain distributions (also called capital
2005. You must report as a long-term capitalgain dividends) are paid to you or credited to Fractional shares.You may not own enough
gain any nondividend distribution you receive onyour account by regulated investment compa- stock in a corporation to receive a full share of
this stock in later years.nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be dend. However, with the approval of the share-
shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you holders, the corporation may set up a plan inLiquidating Distributionsreceive from the mutual fund or REIT. which fractional shares are not issued, but in-
Report capital gain distributions as long-term stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq-capital gains regardless of how long you owned to the shareholders. Any cash you receive foruidating dividends, are distributions you receiveyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. fractional shares under such a plan is treated asduring a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalporation. These distributions are, at least in part,Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds shares. You must determine your gain or lossone form of a return of capital. They may be paidand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-in one or more installments. You will receive akeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is theForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showingthem. You must treat your share of these gains difference between the cash you receive and theyou the amount of the liquidating distribution inas distributions, even though you did not actu- basis of the fractional shares sold.box 8 or 9.ally receive them. However, they are not in-For more information on liquidating distribu-cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are Example. You own one share of commontions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- stock that you bought on January 3, 1997, forholder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital $100. The corporation declared a common stockGains. dividend of 5% on June 30, 2005. The fair mar-Distributions of StockReport undistributed capital gains (box 1a of ket value of the stock at the time the stockForm 2439) as long-term capital gains on and Stock Rights dividend was declared was $200. You were paidSchedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11. $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under  Distributions by a corporation of its own stockThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual a plan described in the above paragraph. Youare commonly known as stock dividends. Stockfund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. figure your gain or loss as follows:rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-You take credit for this tax by including it on
butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theForm 1040, line 70, and checking box a on that Fair market value of old stock..... $200.00corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendsline. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, Fair market value of stock dividendand stock rights are not taxable to you, and youand keep Copy C for your records. (cash received)...............  +10.00do not report them on your return. Fair market value of old stock andBasis adjustment. Increase your basis in stock dividend................ $210.00your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byTaxable stock dividends and stock rights.
the difference between the gain you report and Distributions of stock dividends and stock rightsBasis (cost) of old stock after the
the credit you claim for the tax paid. are taxable to you if any of the following apply. stock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) $95.24
Page 62 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 65 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷ Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,
$210) × $100)................ +  4.76 dividends you receive in money from a coopera-you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.
Total...................... $100.00 tive organization are included in your income.List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each
Do not include in your income patronageCash received................ $10.00 payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-dividends you receive on:Basis (cost) of stock dividend...... − 4.76 dends you received. If your securities are heldGain $5.24 by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list the1. Property bought for your personal use, orname of the brokerage firm that is shown onBecause you had held the share of stock for2. Capital assets or depreciable propertyForm 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock ismore than 1 year at the time the stock dividendbought for use in your business. But youheld by a nominee who is the owner of record,was declared, your gain on the stock dividend ismust reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsand the nominee credited or paid you dividendsa long-term capital gain. bought. If the dividend is more than theon the stock, show the name of the nominee andScrip dividends. A corporation that de- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-the dividends you received or for which you wereclares a stock dividend may issue you a scripport the excess as income. credited.certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.These rules are the same whether the coop-Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedThe certificate is generally nontaxable when youerative paying the dividend is a taxable oron line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, linereceive it. If you choose to have the corporationtax-exempt cooperative. 9a.sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-
ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-
tween the proceeds and the portion of your basisAlaska Permanent Fund dividends.  Do not Qualified dividends.Report qualified divi-in the corporation’s stock that is allocated to thereport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofcertificate. port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, FormForm 1040 or Form 1040A. Do not include any
1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3.However, if you receive a scrip certificate of the following on line 9b.
that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
• Qualified dividends you received as a
ceive it. You must include its fair market value in nominee. See Nominees under How to
income on the date you receive it. Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 ofHow To Report
Publication 550.
Dividend Income • Dividends on stock for which you did not
meet the holding period. See Holding pe-
 Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orOther Distributions riod earlier under Qualified Dividends.
Form 1040A to report your dividend income.
• Dividends on any share of stock to theReport the total of your ordinary dividends onYou may receive any of the following distribu- extent that you are obligated (whetherline 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Reporttions during the year. under a short sale or otherwise) to makequalified dividends on line 9b.
related payments for positions in substan-  If you receive capital gain distributions, youExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest tially similar or related property.may be able to use Form 1040A or you maydividends you receive from a regulated invest-have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifment company (mutual fund) are not included inbutions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv-you know or have reason to know that theyour taxable income. You will receive a noticeidend distributions required to be reported aspayments are not qualified dividends.from the mutual fund telling you the amount ofcapital gains, you must use Form 1040. Youthe exempt-interest dividends you received. • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxcannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive anyExempt-interest dividends are not shown on 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentdividend income.Form 1099-DIV or Form 1099-INT. you know or have reason to know the pay-
ments are not qualified dividends.Information reporting requirement.Al- Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-you received $10 or more in dividends and otherIf you have qualified dividends, you must fig-able, you must show them on your tax return ifdistributions, you should receive a Form ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-you have to file a return. This is an information1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Formdends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in thereporting requirement and does not change the1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxableForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.dividend income. ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
Alternative minimum tax treatment. See Form 1099-DIV for more information ontions, whichever applies. Enter qualified
Exempt-interest dividends paid from specifiedhow to report dividend income. dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
private activity bonds may be subject to the
Investment interest deducted.If you claimalternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini-Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1a deduction for investment interest, you maymum Tax in chapter 30 for more information.(Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Formhave to reduce the amount of your qualified
1040A, if: dividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax
Dividends on insurance policies.Insurance rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,policy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses dends you choose to include in investment in-box 1a) are more than $1,500, orto pay your premiums are not taxable. However, come when figuring the limit on your investment
you must report as taxable interest income the interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified2. You received, as a nominee, dividendsinterest that is paid or credited on dividends leftthat actually belong to someone else. Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet orwith the insurance company. the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-List on line 5 each payer’s name and theIf dividends on an insurance contract (other mation about the limit on investment interest,amount of ordinary dividends you received. Ifthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib- see Interest Expenses in chapter 23.you received a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerageuted to you, they are a partial return of thefirm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.premiums you paid. Do not include them in yourEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedExpenses related to dividend income.Yougross income until they are more than the total ofon line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040A,may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-all net premiums you paid for the contract. Re-line 9a. dend income if you itemize your deductions onport any taxable distributions on insurance poli-
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28 forcies on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line
general information about deducting expenses12b. Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Partof producing income.II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- 1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,More information. For more informationdends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-box 1a) are more than $1,500, or about how to report dividend income, see chap-cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on
ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for thedividends left with the Department of Veterans 2. You received, as a nominee, dividends
form you must file.Affairs is not taxable. that actually belong to someone else.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate DistributionsPage 63

Page 66 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive as normal rent payments, there are
other amounts that may be rental income. Rental Expenses
When to report. If you are a cash basis tax-9. This part discusses expenses of renting prop-payer, report rental income on your return for theerty that you ordinarily can deduct from youryear you actually or constructively receive it.rental income. It includes information on theYou are a cash basis taxpayer if you reportexpenses you can deduct if you rent part of yourincome in the year you receive it, regardless ofRental Income property, or if you change your property to rentalwhen it was earned. You constructively receiveuse. Depreciation, which you can also deductincome when it is made available to you, forfrom your rental income, is discussed later.and Expenses example, by being credited to your bank ac-
count. When to deduct. You generally deduct your
For more information about when you con-rental expenses in the year you pay them.
structively receive income, see AccountingIntroduction Vacant rental property.If you hold propertyMethods in chapter 1.
for rental purposes, you may be able to deductThis chapter discusses rental income and ex-
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-Advance rent. Advance rent is any amountpenses. It covers the following topics.
ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, oryou receive before the period that it covers.
• Rental income. maintaining the property while the property isInclude advance rent in your rental income in the
vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss ofyear you receive it regardless of the period cov-• Rental expenses. rental income for the period the property is va-ered or the method of accounting you use.
• Personal use of dwelling unit (including cant.
vacation home). Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rentPre-rental expenses.You can deduct youryour property. In the first year, you receive• Depreciation. ordinary and necessary expenses for managing,$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rentconserving, or maintaining rental property from• Limits on rental losses. for the last year of the lease. You must includethe time you make it available for rent.$10,000 in your income in the first year.• How to report your rental income and ex-
Depreciation.You can begin to depreciatepenses. Security deposits.Do not include a securityrental property when it is ready and available for
deposit in your income when you receive it if yourent. See Placed-in-Service Date under Depre-If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rentalplan to return it to your tenant at the end of theciation, in Publication 527.property, see Publication 544, Sales and Otherlease. But if you keep part or all of the securityDispositions of Assets. Expenses for rental property sold.If you selldeposit during any year because your tenant
If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of, property you held for rental purposes, you candoes not live up to the terms of the lease, include
rental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses forthe amount you keep in your income for that
Disasters, and Thefts. managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-year.
erty until it is sold.If you rent a condominium or a cooperativeIf an amount called a security deposit is to be
apartment, some special rules apply to you evenused as a final payment of rent, it is advancePersonal use of rental property. If youthough you receive the same tax treatment asrent. Include it in your income when you receivesometimes use your rental property for personalother owners of rental property. See Publicationit. purposes, you must divide your expenses be-527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor- tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalPayment for canceling a lease.If your tenantmation. expense deductions may be limited. See Per-pays you to cancel a lease, the amount yousonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacationreceive is rent. Include the payment in yourUseful Items Home), later.income in the year you receive it regardless ofYou may want to see: your method of accounting. Part interest.If you own a part interest in
rental property, you can deduct your part of thePublication Expenses paid by tenant.If your tenant paysexpenses that you paid.any of your expenses, the payments are rental❏ 527 Residential Rental Property Uncollected rent.If you are a cash basis tax-income. You must include them in your income.
❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in payer, you do not report uncollected rent. Be-You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-
Service Before 1987 cause you do not include it in your income, youible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses,
cannot deduct it.later, for more information.❏ 535 Business Expenses If you use an accrual method, you report
Property or services.If you receive property❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules income when you earn it. If you are unable to
or services, instead of money, as rent, includecollect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as a❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property the fair market value of the property or servicesbusiness bad debt. See chapter 11 of Publica-
in your rental income. tion 535 for more information about businessForm (and Instructions) If the services are provided at an agreedbad debts.
upon or specified price, that price is the fair❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
market value unless there is evidence to the❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— Repairs and Improvementscontrary.Individuals
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rentalRental of property also used as a home.If❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-you rent property that you also use as your
provements. You recover the cost of improve-❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during
ments by taking depreciation (explained later).Income and Loss the tax year, do not include the rent you receive
in your income and do not deduct rental ex- Separate the costs of repairs and im-
penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule provements, and keep accurate rec-
A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty ords. You will need to know the cost ofRECORDS
and theft losses that are allowed for nonrentalimprovements when you sell or depreciate yourRental Income property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unitproperty.
(Including Vacation Home), later.
You generally must include in your gross income Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good
all amounts you receive as rent. Rental incomePart interest.If you own a part interest in operating condition. It does not materially add to
is any payment you receive for the use or occu- rental property, you must report your part of the the value of your property or substantially pro-
pation of property. In addition to amounts you rental income from the property. long its life. Repainting your property inside or
Page 64 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 67 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster- erly allocate your expenses between rental and
ing, and replacing broken windows are exam-nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the costProperty Changedples of repairs. of traveling away from home if the primary pur-
If you make repairs as part of an extensivepose of the trip was the improvement of yourto Rental Useremodeling or restoration of your property, theproperty. You recover the cost of improvements
whole job is an improvement. by taking depreciation. For information on travelIf you change your home or other property, (or a
expenses, see chapter 26. part of it), to rental use at any time other than atImprovements. An improvement adds to the
the beginning of your tax year, you must dividevalue of property, prolongs its useful life, or To deduct travel expenses, you must
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,adapts it to new uses. Improvements include the keep records that follow the rules in
between rental use and personal use.following items. chapter 26.RECORDS
You can deduct as rental expenses only the• Putting a recreation room in an unfinished part of the expense that is for the part of the yearbasement. Local transportation expenses. You can the property was used or held for rental pur-deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-• Paneling a den. poses.portation expenses if you incur them to collectFor depreciation purposes, treat the property• Adding a bathroom or bedroom. rental income or to manage, conserve, or main-as being placed in service on the conversiontain your rental property.• Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony. date.Generally, if you use your personal car, You cannot deduct depreciation or insurance• Putting up a fence. pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, youfor the part of the year the property was held forcan deduct the expenses using one of two meth-• Putting in new plumbing or wiring. personal use. However, you can include theods: actual expenses or the standard mileagehome mortgage interest and real estate tax ex-• Putting in new cabinets. rate. For 2005, the standard mileage rate for allpenses for the part of the year the property was• Putting on a new roof. business miles driven before September 1 is held for personal use as an itemized deduction401/2 cents a mile. The rate is 481/2 cents a mileon Schedule A (Form 1040).• Paving a driveway. for all business miles driven after August 31. For
more information, see chapter 26. Example. Your tax year is the calendarIf you make an improvement to property, the
year. You moved from your home in May andcost of the improvement must be capitalized. To deduct car expenses under either
started renting it on June 1. You can deduct asThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci- method, you must keep records that
rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlyated as if the improvement were separate prop- follow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-RECORDS
expenses, such as taxes and insurance.erty. tion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, and
Starting with June, you can deduct as rentalattach it to your tax return.
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-Other Expenses ally billed monthly, such as utilities.Tax return preparation.You can deduct, as a
rental expense, the part of the tax return prepa-Other expenses you can deduct from your rental
ration fees you paid to prepare Schedule Eincome include advertising, cleaning and main-
tenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance,(Form 1040), Part I. For example, on your 2005
taxes, interest, commissions for the collection ofSchedule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2005 toRenting Part of
rent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans-prepare your 2004 Schedule E, Part I. You can
portation, and other expenses, discussed next.also deduct, as a rental expense, any expenseProperty
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidRental payments for property.You can de- to resolve a tax underpayment related to yourIf you rent part of your property, you must divideduct the rent you pay for property that you use certain expenses between the part of the prop-rental activities.for rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold for erty used for rental purposes and the part of therental purposes, you can deduct an equal part of property used for personal purposes, as thoughthe cost each year over the term of the lease. you actually had two separate pieces of prop-
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the erty.Not Rented for Profitrent you pay for equipment that you use for You can deduct the expenses related to the
rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease part of the property used for rental purposes,If you do not rent your property to make a profit,contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, such as home mortgage interest and real estateyou can deduct your rental expenses only up toyou cannot deduct these payments. You can taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formthe amount of your rental income. You cannotrecover the cost of purchased equipment 1040). You can also deduct as a rental expensecarry forward to the next year any rental ex-through depreciation. a part of other expenses that normally are non-penses that are more than your rental income fordeductible personal expenses, such as ex-Insurance premiums paid in advance.If you the year. For more information about the rulespenses for electricity or painting the outside ofpay an insurance premium for more than onefor an activity not engaged in for profit, seeyour house.year in advance, each year you can deduct thechapter 1 of Publication 535. You can deduct the expenses for the part ofpart of the premium payment that will apply to
the property used for personal purposes, subjectthat year. You cannot deduct the total premiumWhere to report. Report your not-for-profitto certain limitations, only if you itemize yourin the year you pay it. rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You candeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
include your mortgage interest (if you use theLocal benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot You cannot deduct any part of the cost of theproperty as your main home or second home),deduct charges for local benefits that increase first phone line even if your tenants have unlim-the value of your property, such as charges forreal estate taxes, and casualty losses on theited use of it.putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewerappropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A,You do not have to divide the expenses thatsystems. These charges are nondepreciableItemized Deductions, if you itemize your deduc-belong only to the rental part of your property.capital expenditures. You must add them to thetions. For example, if you paint a room that you rent, orbasis of your property. You can deduct localClaim your other rental expenses, subject toif you pay premiums for liability insurance inbenefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publicationconnection with renting a room in your home,ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits.535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onyour entire cost is a rental expense. If you install
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 22. You can deductTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- a second phone line strictly for your tenants’
these expenses only if they, together with cer-nary and necessary expenses of traveling away use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
tain other miscellaneous itemized deductions,from home if the primary purpose of the trip was ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
total more than 2% of your adjusted gross in-to collect rental income or to manage, conserve, ciation, discussed later, on the part of the
come.or maintain your rental property. You must prop- property used for rental purposes as well as on
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 65

Page 68 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the furniture and equipment you use for rental the apartment and allowed you to use it evenDwelling Unit though you did not refund any of the rent. Yourpurposes.
Used as Home family actually used the apartment for 10 of
those days. Therefore, the apartment is treatedHow to divide expenses.If an expense is forThe tax treatment of rental income and ex-as having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days.both rental use and personal use, such as mort-penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forYou figure 10% of the total days rented to othersgage interest or heat for the entire house, youpersonal purposes depends on whether you useat a fair rental price is 16 days. Your family alsomust divide the expense between the rental useit as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Incomeused the apartment for 7 other days during theand the personal use. You can use any reasona-and Deductions, later.) year.ble method for dividing the expense. It may beYou use a dwelling unit as a home during theYou used the apartment as a home becausereasonable to divide the cost of some items (fortax year if you use it for personal purposes moreyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days.example, water) based on the number of peoplethan the greater of: That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%using them. However, the two most common of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).methods for dividing an expense are one based 1. 14 days, or
on the number of rooms in your home and one2. 10% of the total days it is rented to othersbased on the square footage of your home. at a fair rental price. Use As Main Home Before or After
RentingSee Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-For purposes of determining whether a dwellingposes on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,unit was used as a home, you may not have toPersonal Use of do not count that day as a day of rental use incount days you used the property as your mainapplying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day ofhome before or after renting it or offering it forDwelling Unit personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.rent as days of personal use. Do not count themThis rule does not apply when dividing expensesas days of personal use if:(Including Vacation between rental and personal use.
• You rented or tried to rent the property for
Fair rental price.A fair rental price for yourHome) 12 or more consecutive months.
property generally is the amount of rent that a
• You rented or tried to rent the property forperson who is not related to you would be willingIf you have any personal use of a dwelling unit
a period of less than 12 consecutiveto pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental(including a vacation home) that you rent, you
months and the period ended becauseprice if it is substantially less than the rentsmust divide your expenses between rental use you sold or exchanged the property.charged for other properties that are similar toand personal use. See Figuring Days of Per-
your property.sonal Use and  How To Divide Expenses, later. This special rule does not apply when dividing
expenses between rental and personal use. If you used your dwelling unit for personal
purposes, it may be considered a “dwelling unit
Examplesused as a home.” If it is, you cannot deduct Figuring Days
rental expenses that are more than your rentalThe following examples show how to determineof Personal Useincome for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used aswhether you used your rental property as aHome and How To Figure Rental Income andhome. A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anyDeductions, later. If your dwelling unit is not day that the unit is used by any of the followingconsidered a dwelling unit used as a home, youExample 1. You converted the basement ofpersons.can deduct rental expenses that are more thanyour home into an apartment with a bedroom, a
rental income for the unit subject to certain lim- 1. You or any other person who has an inter-bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the
its. See Limits on Rental Losses, later. est in it, unless you rent it to another ownerbasement apartment at a fair rental price to
as his or her main home under a sharedcollege students during the regular school year.
Exception for minimal rental use.If you use equity financing agreement (defined later).You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273
However, see Use as Main Home Beforethe dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerdays). You figured 10% of the total days rented
or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Usedthan 15 days during the year, do not include anyto others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
As Home , earlier.During June (30 days), your brother stayedof the rent in your income and do not deduct any
with you and lived in the basement apartmentof the rental expenses. To determine if you use a 2. A member of your family or a member ofrent free.dwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used the family of any other person who has anYour basement apartment was used as aas Home, later. interest in it, unless the family memberhome because you used it for personal pur- uses the dwelling unit as his or her mainposes for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brotherDwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes a home and pays a fair rental price. Familyis considered personal use. Your personal usehouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home, includes only brothers and sisters,(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days orboat, vacation home, or similar property. A half-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).dwelling unit has basic living accommodations, cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) and
such as sleeping space, a toilet, and cooking lineal descendants (children, grandchild-Example 2. You rented the guest bedroomfacilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop- ren, etc.).in your home at a fair rental price during the localerty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar 3. Anyone under an arrangement that letscollege’s homecoming, commencement, andestablishment. you use some other dwelling unit.football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your  Property is used solely as a hotel, motel,sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.inn, or similar establishment if it is regularlylast 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%
available for occupancy by paying customersof the total days rented to others at a fair rentalMain home. If the other person or member ofand is not used by an owner as a home duringprice is 3 days. the family in (1) or (2) above has more than onethe year. The room was used as a home because youhome, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneused it for personal purposes for 21 days. That ishe or she lived in most of the time.Example. You rent a room in your home more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the
that is always available for short-term occu- Shared equity financing agreement.This is27 days it was rented (3 days).
pancy by paying customers. You do not use the an agreement under which two or more persons
room yourself, and you allow only paying cus-Example 3. You own a condominium apart- acquire undivided interests for more than 50
tomers to use the room. The room is used solelyment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental years in an entire dwelling unit, including the
as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishmentprice for a total of 170 days during the year. For land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-
and is not a dwelling unit. 12 of those days, the tenant was not able to use tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home
Page 66 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 69 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1.Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total or your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1. Enter rents received.................................................................
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)........................
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes..................................................
c. Enter the rental portion of deduction casualty and theft losses (see instructions)........................
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)...............................................
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d..........................................
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero..........................................
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as repairs,
insurance, and utilities)...............................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)...............................
c. Add lines 4a and 4b..................................................................
d. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c.......................................
5. Subtract line 4d fro line 3. If zero or less, enter zero............................................
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)..........................
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit.......................................
c. Add lines 6a and 6b..................................................................
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c........
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c.....................
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 6d from line
6 c..............................................................................
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
Worksheet Instructions come figured without your rental income and Do not include interest on a loan that did not
Follow these instructions for the worksheet expenses from the dwelling unit. If your loss benefit the dwelling unit (as explained in the line
above. If you were unable to deduct all your occurred after August 24, 2005, and was the 2a instructions).
expenses last year, because of the rental in- result of Hurricane Katrina, enter zero on line 19.Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
come limit, add these unused amounts to your Enter the rental portion of the result from Form casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684
expenses for this year. 4684, line 18, on line 2c of this worksheet. you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on theNote. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to
dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule figure your personal losses on Schedule A. In-A. Enter the amount from Form 4684,A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the unit. Do stead, figure the personal portion on a separateline 10....................not include interest on a loan that did not benefit Form 4684.
B. Enter the rental portion of A......the dwelling unit. For example, do not includeLine 2d. Enter the total of your rental ex-
interest on a home equity loan used to pay off penses that are directly related only to the rentalC. Enter the amount from line 2c of thiscredit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, activity. These include interest on loans used forworksheet..................
or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan rental activities other than to buy, build, or im-
D. Subtract C from B. Enter the resultused to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, prove the dwelling unit. Also include rental
here and on line 6a of this worksheetor to refinance such a loan. Enter the rental agency fees, advertising, office supplies, and
portion of this interest on line 2a of the work- depreciation on office equipment used in yourAllocating the limited deduction. If you
sheet. rental activity. cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or 6c
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft lossesLine 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rentalthis year, you can allocate the allowable deduc-
related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct portion of the mortgage interest you could de-tion in any way you wish among the expenses
on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented duct on Schedule A if you had not rented theincluded on line 4c or 6c. Enter the amount you
the dwelling unit. To do this, complete Form dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this worksheetallocate to each expense on the appropriate line
4684, Casualties and Thefts, Section A, treating the rental portion of the mortgage interest youof Schedule E, Part I.
the losses as personal losses. On Form 4684, could not deduct on Schedule A because it is
line 19, enter 10% of your adjusted gross in- more than the limit on home mortgage interest.
upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or Because your neighbor has an interest in the
Examples
owners. unit, both of you are considered to have used the
The following examples show how to determineunit for personal purposes during those 2Donation of use of property. You use a days of personal use. weeks.dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
Example 1. You and your neighbor are Example 2. You and your neighbors are• You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Youco-owners of a house under a shared equityble organization,
rent the unit to vacationers whenever possible.financing agreement. Your neighbors live in the• The organization sells the use of the unitThe unit is not used as a main home by anyone.house and pay you a fair rental price.at a fund-raising event, and Your neighbor uses the unit for 2 weeks everyEven though your neighbors have an interest
• The “purchaser” uses the unit. year. in the house, the days your neighbors live there
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 67

Page 70 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are not counted as days of personal use by you. you received a fair rental price for the
weekend.This is because your neighbors rent the house Depreciation
as their main home under a shared equity fi-2. You used the cottage for personal pur-nancing agreement. You recover your cost in income producingposes for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in
property through yearly tax deductions. You doMay).Example 3. You own a rental property that this by depreciating the property; that is, by3. The total use of the cottage was 99 daysyou rent to your son. Your son has no interest in deducting some of the cost on your tax return(14 days personal use + 85 days rentalthis property. He uses it as his main home. He each year.use).pays you a fair rental price for the property. Three basic factors determine how much de-
Your son’s use of the property is not personal preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) your4. Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of
use by you because your son is using it as his basis in the property, (2) the recovery period forthe cottage expenses.
main home, he has no interest in the property, the property, and (3) the depreciation methodWhen determining whether you used the cot-and he is paying you a fair rental price. used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgagetage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youor principal payments, or the cost of furniture,used it is personal use even though you re-Example 4. You rent your beach house to fixtures and equipment, as an expense.ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun- You can deduct depreciation only on the partfore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price. of your property used for rental purposes. De-days of rental use for this purpose. Because youpreciation reduces your basis for figuring gain orYou are using your house for personal pur-used the cottage for personal purposes moreloss on a later sale or exchange.poses on the days that Joshua uses it becausethan 14 days and more than 10% of the days of  You may have to use Form 4562 to figureyour house is used by Joshua under an arrange-rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If youand report your depreciation. See How To Re-ment that allows you to use his house. have a net loss, you may not be able to deductport Rental Income and Expenses, later.all of the rental expenses. See Property Used as
a Home  in the following discussion. Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.Days Used for Repairs and You should claim the correct amount of depreci-Maintenance ation each tax year. Even if you did not claimHow To Figure Rental depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,Any day that you spend working substantially fullIncome and Deductions you must still reduce your basis in the propertytime repairing and maintaining (not improving) by the full amount of depreciation that you couldyour property is not counted as a day of personalHow you figure your rental income and deduc-have deducted. If you did not deduct the correctuse. Do not count such a day as a day of per-tions depends on whether you used the dwellingamount of depreciation for property in any year,sonal use even if family members use the prop-unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used as you may be able to make a correction for thaterty for recreational purposes on the same day.Home,  earlier) and, if you used it as a home,year by filing Form 1040X, Amended U.S Indi-
how many days the property was rented at a fairvidual Income Tax Return. If you are not allowed
rental price.How To Divide Expenses to make the correction on an amended return,
you can change your accounting method to
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and claim the correct amount of depreciation. See
Property Not Used as a Homepersonal purposes, divide your expenses be- Claiming the correct amount of depreciation in
tween the rental use and the personal use based Publication 527 for more information.If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,on the number of days used for each purpose. Changing your accounting method to de-report all the rental income and deduct all theYou can deduct expenses for the rental use of duct unclaimed depreciation. To changerental expenses. See How To Report Rentalthe unit under the rules explained in How To your accounting method, you must file FormIncome and Expenses, later.Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later. 3115, Application for Change in Accounting Your deductible rental expenses can be When dividing your expenses follow these Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In somemore than your gross rental income. However,rules. instances, that consent is automatic. For moresee Limits on Rental Losses, later.
information, see chapter 1 of Publication 946.• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
rental price is a day of rental use even if Land. You can never depreciate the cost ofyou used the unit for personal purposesProperty Used as a Home land because land does not wear out, becomethat day. This rule does not apply when obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing,If you use a dwelling unit as a home during thedetermining whether you used the unit as grading, planting, and landscaping are usuallyyear (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier),a home. all part of the cost of land and cannot be depreci-how you figure your rental income and deduc-ated.• Any day that the unit is available for renttions depends on how many days the unit was
but not actually rented is not a day ofrented at a fair rental price. More information. See Publication 527 forrental use. more information about depreciating rental
Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use a property and see Publication 946, How To De-
dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerExample. Your beach cottage was avail- preciate Property, for more information about
than 15 days during the year, do not include anyable for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 depreciation.
rental income in your income. Also, you cannotdays). Your family uses the cottage during the
deduct any expenses as rental expenses.last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unable Other Rules Aboutto find a renter for the first week in August (7
Depreciable Propertydays). The person who rented the cottage forRented 15 days or more.If you use a dwell-
July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2 ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more
In addition to the rules about what methods youduring the year, you include all your rental in-days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.
can use, there are other rules you should become in your income. See How To ReportThe cottage was not used at all before May 17 or
aware of with respect to depreciable property.Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had aafter August 31.
net profit from the rental property for the yearYou figure the part of the cottage expenses Gain from disposition. If you dispose of(that is, if your rental income is more than theto treat as rental expenses as follows. depreciable property at a gain, you may have tototal of your rental expenses, including depreci-report, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How-1. The cottage was used for rental a total of See Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-ever, if you had a net loss, your deduction for85 days (92 − 7). The days it was available tions of Assets.certain rental expenses is limited.for rent but not rented (7 days) are not
days of rental use. The July weekend (2 Use Worksheet 9-1 to figure your deductibleAlternative minimum tax.If you use acceler-
days) you used it is rental use because expenses. ated depreciation, you may have to file Form
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 71 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex- you normally report your rental income and ex-
mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other cess loss or credit is carried forward to the nextpenses on Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I. How-
method that allows you to deduct more depreci- tax year. ever, do not use that schedule to report a
ation than you could deduct using a straight line not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit,For a detailed discussion of these rules, see
method. earlier.Publication 925.
   If you provide significant services that areYou may have to complete Form 8582 to
primarily for your tenant’s convenience, such asfigure the amount of any passive activity loss for
regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv-the current tax year for all activities and the
amount of the passive activity loss allowed onice, you report your rental income and expensesLimits on
your tax return. on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
Rental Losses Business or Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From
Business (Sole Proprietorship). Significant serv-Exception for real estate professionals.
Rental real estate activities are generally con- ices do not include the furnishing of heat andRental activities in which you materially partici-
sidered passive activities, and the amount of light, cleaning of public areas, trash collection,pated during the year are not passive activities
loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you etc. For information, see Publication 334, Taxif, for that year, you were a real estate profes-
cannot deduct losses from rental real estate Guide for Small Business (For Individuals Whosional. For a detailed discussion of the require-
activities unless you have income from otherments, see Publication 527. For a detailedUse Schedule C or C-EZ). You also may have to
passive activities. However, you may be able todiscussion of material participation, see Publica-pay self-employment tax on your rental income.
deduct rental losses without regard to whethertion 925.
you have income from other passive activities if Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort-you “materially” or “actively” participated in your gage interest on your rental property to any onerental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. Losses From Rental Real Estate person, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-
Losses from passive activities are first sub-Activities gage Interest Statement, or similar statementject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the showing the interest you paid for the year. If youamount of deductible losses from holding mostIf you or your spouse actively participated in aand at least one other person (other than yourreal property placed in service after 1986.passive rental real estate activity, you can de-spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for,duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromand paid interest on the mortgage, and the otheryour nonpassive income. This special allowanceException. If your rental losses are less than person received the Form 1098, report youris an exception to the general rule disallowing$25,000 and you actively participated in the share of the interest on Form 1040, Schedule E,losses in excess of income from passive activi-rental activity, the passive activity limits probably line 13. Attach a statement to your return show-ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from thedo not apply to you. See Losses From Rental ing the name and address of the other person. Inactivity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofReal Estate Activities, later. the left margin of Schedule E (Form 1040), nextnonpassive income after taking into account anyto line 13, enter “See attached.”losses allowed under this exception.Property used as a home. If you used the
If you are married, filing a separate return,rental property as a home during the year, the Schedule E (Form 1040)and lived apart from your spouse for the entirepassive activity rules do not apply to that home.
tax year, your special allowance cannot be moreInstead, you must follow the rules explained Use Form 1040, Schedule E, Part I, to reportthan $12,500. If you lived with your spouse atearlier under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In- your rental income and expenses. List your totalany time during the year and are filing a sepa-cluding Vacation Home). income, expenses, and depreciation for eachrate return, you cannot use the special allow-
rental property. Be sure to answer the questionance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax
At-Risk Rules on line 2.on nonpassive income.
If you have more than three rental or royaltyThe maximum amount of the special allow- The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you properties, complete and attach as manyance is reduced if your modified adjusted grosscan deduct as losses from activities often de- Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.income is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-ried filing separately).property (other than mineral property) placed in ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only oneservice before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk Schedule E. The figures in the “Totals” columnActive participation.You actively partici-rules. on that Schedule E should be the combinedpated in a rental real estate activity if you (andGenerally, any loss from an activity subject totals of all Schedules E.your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rentalto the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of
Schedule E, page 2, is used to report incomeproperty and you made management decisionsthe total amount you have at risk in the activity at
in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage- or loss from partnerships, S corporations, es-the end of the tax year. You are considered at
ment decisions include approving new tenants,tates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-risk in an activity to the extent of cash and the
deciding on rental terms, approving expendi-ment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E,adjusted basis of other property you contributed
tures, and similar decisions. page 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E youto the activity and certain amounts borrowed for
used to enter the combined totals in Part I.use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more
information. More information. See Publication 925 for On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the
more information on the passive loss limits, in-depreciation you are claiming. You must com-
cluding information on the treatment of unusedplete and attach Form 4562 for rental activitiesPassive Activity Limits disallowed passive losses and credits and theonly if you are claiming:
treatment of gains and losses realized on theIn general, all rental activities (except those • Depreciation on property placed in servicedisposition of a passive activity.meeting the exception for real estate profession- during 2005,als, later) are passive activities. For this pur-
pose, a rental activity is an activity from which • Depreciation on listed property (such as a
you receive income mainly for the use of tangi- car), regardless of when it was placed in
ble property, rather than for services. service, orHow To Report
• Any car expenses reported on a formLimits on passive activity deductions andRental Income other than Schedule C or C-EZ (Formcredits. Deductions for losses from passive 1040) or Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.activities are limited. You generally cannot offsetand Expenses
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownincome, other than passive income, with losses
worksheet. You do not have to attach thesefrom passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and
computations to your return.on income, other than passive income, with provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions) Withholding and estimated tax. The payer
of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an-❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pensionnuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-or Annuity Payments10. hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts
❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions, paid to you. You can choose not to have tax
Annuities, Retirement or withheld unless they are eligible rollover distri-
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, butions. See Eligible rollover distributions under
Retirement Insurance Contracts, etc. Rollovers, later. You make this choice by filing
Form W-4P.❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions For payments other than eligible rollover dis-Plans, Pensions, ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Planstributions, you can tell the payer how to withhold
(Including IRAs) and Other by filing Form W-4P. If you receive an eligible
Tax-Favored Accounts rollover distribution, 20% will generally be with-and Annuities
held. There is no withholding on a direct rollover
of an eligible rollover distribution. See Direct
rollover option under Rollovers, later. If you
What’s New choose not to have tax withheld or you do not
General Information have enough tax withheld, you may have to pay
estimated tax.Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
For more information, see Pensions and An-This Act provides tax relief for persons affectedDisability Pensions.If you retired on disabil-
nuities under Withholding in chapter 4.by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you mayity, you generally must include in income any
disability pension you receive under a plan thatqualify for tax-favored withdrawals, recontribu-
Loans. If you borrow money from your quali-is paid for by your employer. You must reporttions, and loans. See Publication 4492. fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu-your taxable disability payments as wages on
ity program, government plan, or contractline 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you
purchased under any of these plans, you mayreach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-
have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-ment age generally is the age at which you canIntroduction tion unless certain exceptions apply. Thisfirst receive a pension or annuity if you are not
means that you must include in income all ordisabled.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis- part of the amount borrowed. Even if you do nottributions you receive from: You may be entitled to a tax credit ifhave to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-
you were permanently and totally dis-tion, you may not be able to deduct the interest• An employee pension or annuity from a
abled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
on the loan in some situations. For details, seequalified plan, tion on this credit, see chapter 33. Loans Treated as Distributions in Publication• A disability retirement, and Beginning on the day after you reach mini-575. For information on the deductibility of inter-
mum retirement age, payments you receive areest, see chapter 23.• A purchased commercial annuity. taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
payments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b orQualified plans for self-employed
What is not covered in this chapter.The on Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b. individuals.Qualified plans set up by self-em-
following topics are not discussed in this chap- ployed individuals are sometimes called KeoghDisability payments for injuries in-ter. or H.R. 10 plans. Qualified plans can be set upcurred as a direct result of a terroristby sole proprietors, partnerships (but not a part-The General Rule.This is the method gen- attack directed against the United
TIP
ner), and corporations. They can cover self-em-erally used to determine the tax treatment ofStates (or its allies) are not included in income.ployed persons, such as the sole proprietor orFor more information about payments to survi-pension and annuity income from nonqualified partners, as well as regular (common-law) em-vors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920,plans (including commercial annuities). For a ployees.Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks.qualified plan, you generally cannot use the Distributions from a qualified plan are usuallyFor more information on how to report disa-General Rule unless your annuity starting date fully taxable because most recipients have nobility pensions, including military and certainis before November 19, 1996. For more informa- cost basis. If you have an investment (cost) ingovernment disability pensions, see chapter 5.tion about the General Rule, see Publication the plan, however, your pension or annuity pay-939. ments from a qualified plan are taxed under theMore than one program.If you receive bene-
Simplified Method. For more information aboutCivil service retirement benefits.If you fits from more than one program under a single
qualified plans, see Publication 560, Retirementare retired from the federal government (eithertrust or plan of your employer, such as a pension
Plans for Small Business.regular or disability retirement), see Publicationplan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have to
721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirementfigure the taxable part of each separately. Your
Section 457 deferred compensation plans.former employer or the plan administratorBenefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor-
If you work for a state or local government or forshould be able to tell you if you have more thanmation that you need if you are the survivor or
a tax-exempt organization, you may be able toone pension or annuity contract.beneficiary of a federal employee or retiree who participate in a section 457 deferred compensa-died. tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you areRailroad retirement benefits.Part of the rail-
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). not taxed currently on pay that is deferred underroad retirement benefits you receive is treated
Information on the tax treatment of amounts you the plan or on any earnings from the plan’sfor tax purposes like social security benefits, and
receive from an IRA is in chapter 17. investment of the deferred pay. You are taxedpart is treated like an employee pension. For
on amounts deferred in an eligible state or localinformation about railroad retirement benefits
government plan only when they are distributedtreated as social security benefits, see Publica-Useful Items
from the plan. You are taxed on amounts de-tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-You may want to see: ferred in an eligible tax-exempt organizationroad Retirement Benefits. For information about
plan when they are distributed or otherwiserailroad retirement benefits treated as an em-Publication made available to you.ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement in
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-Publication 575.
efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it does❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If you not cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor-Retirement Benefits receive a pension or annuity, you may be able to mation on deferrals under section 457 plans,
❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions and take the credit for the elderly or the disabled. see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-
Annuities See chapter 33. ployee Compensation in Publication 525.
Page 70 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 73 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For general information on these deferred Your annuity starting date is the later of the ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig-
compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferredfirst day of the first period for which you received ured by ignoring any payment increases), you
Compensation Plans in Publication 575. a payment, or the date the plan’s obligations are entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed
became fixed. payments.Purchased Annuities.If you receive pension
or annuity payments from a privately purchased Who must use the General Rule.You mustForeign employment contributions.If you
annuity contract from a commercial organiza- use the General Rule if you receive pension orworked in a foreign country and contributions
tion, such as an insurance company, you gener- annuity payments from:were made to your retirement plan, special rules
ally must use the General Rule to figure theapply in determining your cost. See Publication• A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-tax-free part of each annuity payment. For more575. nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, orinformation about the General Rule, get Publica- a nonqualified employee plan), ortion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica-
• A qualified plan if you are age 75 or oldertion 575 for the special provisions that apply to
on your annuity starting date and your an-these annuity contracts. Taxation of Periodic nuity payments are guaranteed for at leastTax-free exchange. You do not recognize 5 years.Paymentsgain or loss on an exchange of an annuity con-
tract for another annuity contract if the insured or Annuity starting before November 19,annuitant remains the same. However, if an an-Fully taxable payments.Generally, if you did1996. If your annuity starting date is after Julynuity contract is exchanged for a life insurancenot pay any part of the cost of your employee1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, youor endowment contract, any gain due to interestpension or annuity and your employer did nothad to use the General Rule for either circum-accumulated on the contract is ordinary income.withhold part of the cost from your pay while youstance described above. You also had to use itSee Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica-worked, the amounts you receive each year arefor any fixed-period annuity. If you did not havetion 575 for more information about exchangesfully taxable. You must report them on yourto use the General Rule, you could have chosenof annuity contracts. income tax return. to use it. If your annuity starting date is before
July 2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule
Partly taxable payments.If you paid part ofHow To Report unless you could use the Three-Year Rule.
the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on theIf you had to use the General Rule (or chose
part of the annuity you receive that represents aIf you file Form 1040, report your total annuity on to use it), you must continue to use it each year
return of your cost. The rest of the amount youline 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If your that you recover your cost.
receive is taxable. Your annuity starting datepension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on line
Who cannot use the General Rule.You can-determines which method you must or may use.16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.
not use the General Rule if you receive yourIf you contributed to your pension or annuityIf you file Form 1040A, report your total an-
pension or annuity from a qualified plan andplan, you figure the tax-free and the taxablenuity on line 12a and the taxable part on line
none of the circumstances described in the pre-parts of your annuity payments under either the12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,
ceding discussions apply to you. See Who mustSimplified Method or the General Rule. If yourenter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on line
use the Simplified Method, earlier.annuity starting date is after November 18,12a.
1996, and your payments are from a qualifiedMore information. For complete informationMore than one annuity.If you receive moreplan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen-on using the General Rule, including the actua-than one annuity and at least one of them is noterally, you must use the General Rule only forrial tables you need, see Publication 939.fully taxable, enter the total amount receivednonqualified plans.
from all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a orIf your annuity is paid under a qualified planExclusion limit.Your annuity starting dateForm 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable partand your annuity starting date is after July 1,determines the total amount that you can ex-on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line1986 and before November 19, 1996, you couldclude from your taxable income over the years.12b. If all the annuities you receive are fullyhave chosen to use either the General Rule orExclusion limited to cost.If your annuitytaxable, enter the total of all of them on Formthe Simplified Method. starting date is after 1986, the total amount of1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b.
annuity income that you can exclude over the
Joint return.If you file a joint return and youSimplified Method years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceed
and your spouse each receive one or more pen- your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (or
Under the Simplified Method, you figure thesions or annuities, report the total of the pen- the last annuitant’s) death is allowed as a mis-
tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or cellaneous itemized deduction on the final return
ing your cost by the total number of anticipatedForm 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxable of the decedent. This deduction is not subject to
monthly payments. For an annuity that is pay-part on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
able for the lives of the annuitants, this number12b.
Exclusion not limited to cost.If your an-is based on the annuitants’ ages on the annuity
nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-starting date and is determined from a table. For
tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as longany other annuity, this number is the number of
as you receive your annuity. If you chose a jointmonthly annuity payments under the contract.Cost (Investment in the and survivor annuity, your survivor can continue
Who must use the Simplified Method.You to take the survivor’s exclusion figured as of theContract) must use the Simplified Method if your annuityannuity starting date. The total exclusion may be
starting date is after November 18, 1996, andmore than your cost.Before you can figure how much, if any, of ayou receive pension or annuity payments from a
distribution from your pension or annuity plan is How to use the Simplified Method. Com-qualified plan or annuity, unless you were at
taxable, you must determine your cost (your plete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi-least 75 years old and entitled to annuity pay-
investment in the contract) in the pension or cation 575 to figure your taxable annuity forments from a qualified plan that are guaranteed
annuity. Your total cost in the plan includes eve- 2005. If the annuity is payable only over your life,for 5 years or more.
rything that you paid. It also includes amounts use your age at the annuity starting date to
your employer paid that were taxable to youGuaranteed payments. Your annuity contract determine the total number of expected monthly
when paid. Cost does not include any amounts provides guaranteed payments if a minimum payments for your annuity. For annuity starting
you deducted or excluded from income. number of payments or a minimum amount (for dates beginning in 1998, if your annuity is pay-
From this total cost, subtract any refunds of example, the amount of your investment) is pay- able over your life and the lives of other individu-
premiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans, able even if you and any survivor annuitant do als, use the combined ages of you and the
or other tax-free amounts you received by the not live to receive the minimum. If the minimum youngest survivor annuitant at the annuity start-
later of the annuity starting date or the date on amount is less than the total amount of the ing date. However, if your annuity starting date
which you received your first payment. payments you are to receive, barring death, dur- began before January 1, 1998, the total number
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 71

Page 74 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of monthly annuity payments expected to be receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon ceived after 310 payments are paid must be
Bill’s death. included in gross income.received is based on the primary annuitant’s age
at the annuity starting date. If Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments areBill must use the Simplified Method to figure
made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction willhis taxable annuity because his payments areBe sure to keep a copy of the com- be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the finalfrom a qualified plan and he is under age 75.pleted worksheet; it will help you fig-Because his annuity is payable over the lives of income tax return of the last to die. This deduc-ure your taxable annuity in later years.
TIP
more than one annuitant, he uses his and tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted
Kathy’s combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-gross-income limit.Example. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the Had Bill’s retirement annuity pay-ing retirement benefits in 2005, under a joint andworksheet. His completed worksheet is shown ments been from a nonqualified plan,survivor annuity. Bill’s annuity starting date isin Worksheet 10-A. he would have used the General
TIP
January 1, 2005. The benefits are to be paid forBill’s tax-free monthly amount is $100Rule. He uses the Simplified Method Worksheetthe joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65.($31,000 ÷ 310 as shown on line 4 of the work-because his annuity payments are from a quali-Bill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plansheet). Upon Bill’s death, if Bill has not recov-fied plan.and had received no distributions before theered the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also
annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire-exclude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.
ment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is to The full amount of any annuity payments re-
Taxation ofWorksheet 10-A. Simplified Method Worksheet for Bill Smith
Nonperiodic Payments1.Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.
Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form
Nonperiodic distributions are also known as1040A, line 12a.................................... 1. 14,400
amounts not received as an annuity. They in-2.Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the clude all payments other than periodic paymentsannuity starting date................... 2. 31,000 and corrective distributions.Note: If your annuity starting date wasbefore
this year and you completed this worksheet Corrective distributions of excess plan con-last year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from tributions.If the contributions made for youline 4 of last year’s worksheet on line 4 below. during the year to certain retirement plans ex-Otherwise, go to line 3. ceed certain limits, the excess is taxable to you.3.Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 To correct an excess, your plan may distribute itbelow. But if your annuity starting date was to you (along with any income earned on theafter 1997 and the payments are for your life excess). For information on plan contributionand that of your beneficiary, enter the limits and how to report corrective distributionsappropriate number from Table 2 below..... 3. 310 of excess contributions, see Retirement Plan4.Divide line 2 by the number on line 3....... 4. 100 Contributions under Employee Compensation in5.Multiply line 4 by the number of months for Publication 525.which this year’s payments were made. If your
annuity starting date was before 1987, enter Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodicthis amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7, payments. How you figure the taxable10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6......... 5. 1,200 amount of a nonperiodic distribution depends on6.Enter any amounts previously recovered tax whether it is made before the annuity startingfree in years after 1986................. 6. -0- date or on or after the annuity starting date. The7.Subtract line 6 from line 2............... 7. 31,000 annuity starting date is either the first day of the
8.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7...................... 8. 1,200 first period for which you receive an annuity
9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the payment under the contract or the date on which
result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total for the obligation under the contract becomes fixed,
Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b................ 9. 13,200 whichever is later. If it is made before the annuity
Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use the starting date, its tax treatment also depends on
amount on line 9 instead. whether it is made under a qualified or nonquali-
10.Add lines 6 and 8................................... 10. 1,200 fied plan and, if it is made under a nonqualified
plan, whether it fully discharges the contract or is11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2 . . .11. 29,800
allocable to an investment you made before
August 14, 1982.TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
AND your annuity starting date was— If you receive a nonperiodic payment from
your annuity contract on or after the annuityIF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18,
starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3... starting date, you generally must include all of
the payment in gross income.55 or under 300 360
56–60 260 310 If you receive a nonperiodic distribution
61–65 240 260 before the annuity starting date from a qualified
66–70 170 210 retirement plan, you generally can allocate only
71 or older 120 160 part of it to the cost of the contract. You exclude
from your gross income the part that you allo-
cate to the cost. You include the remainder inTABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
your gross income.IF the combined ages
at annuity starting THEN  enter If you receive a nonperiodic distribution
date were... on line 3... before the annuity starting date from a plan other
110 or under 410 than a qualified retirement plan, it is generally
111–120 360 allocated first to earnings (the taxable part) and
121–130 310 then to the cost of the contract (the tax-free
131–140 260 part). This allocation rule applies, for example,
141 or older 210 to a commercial annuity contract you bought
directly from the issuer.
Page 72 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 75 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see Figuring the Tax-Electing optional lump-sum treatment.You
can choose to use the 10-year tax option orable Amount, under Taxation of Nonperiodic Rolloverscapital gain treatment only once after 1986 forPayments, in Publication 575.
any plan participant. If you make this choice, youIf you withdraw cash or other assets from acannot use either of these optional treatmentsqualified retirement plan in an eligible rolloverLump-Sum Distributions for any future distributions for the participant.distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution
A lump-sum distribution is the distribution or by rolling it over to another qualified retirementTaxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.payment in one tax year of a plan participant’s plan or a traditional IRA.The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is theentire balance from all of the employer’s quali- For this purpose, the following plans areemployer’s contributions and income earned onfied plans of one kind (for example, pension, qualified retirement plans.your account. You may recover your cost in theprofit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-lump sum and any net unrealized appreciation• A qualified employee plan.tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privately(NUA) in employer securities tax free.purchased commercial annuity or a section 457 • A qualified employee annuity.
Cost. In general, your cost is the total of:deferred compensation plan of a state or local • A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan).government or tax-exempt organization) cannot• The plan participant’s nondeductible con-qualify as a lump-sum distribution. • An eligible state or local government sec-tributions to the plan, tion 457 deferred compensation plan.The participant’s entire balance from a plan
• The plan participant’s taxable costs of anydoes not include certain forfeited amounts. It
life insurance contract distributed,also does not include any deductible voluntary Time for making rollover. You generallyemployee contributions allowed by the plan after• Any employer contributions that were tax-must complete the rollover by the 60th day fol-1981 and before 1987. For more information able to the plan participant, and lowing the day on which you receive the distribu-about distributions that do not qualify as tion from your employer’s plan. (This 60-day• Repayments of any loans that were tax-lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do period is extended for the period during whichable to the plan participant.not qualify under Lump-Sum Distributions in the distribution is in a frozen deposit in a finan-
Publication 575. You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-cial institution.) For all rollovers to an IRA, you
If you receive a lump-sum distribution from aously distributed tax free. must irrevocably elect rollover treatment by writ-
qualified employee plan or qualified employee ten notice to the trustee or issuer of the IRA.Net unrealized appreciation (NUA).Theannuity and the plan participant was born beforeNUA in employer securities (box 6 of Form The IRS may waive the 60-day re-January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op-1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu- quirement where the failure to do sotional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu-tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex- would be against equity or good con-
TIP
tion. The part from active participation in the planchange the securities. (For more information,science, such as in the event of a casualty,before 1974 may qualify as capital gain subjectsee Distributions of employer securities under disaster, or other event beyond your reasonableto a 20% tax rate. The part from participationTaxation of Nonperiodic Payments in Publica-control.after 1973 (and any part from participationtion 575.)before 1974 that you do not report as capital Eligible rollover distributions.Generally, angain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofthe 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figureCapital Gain Treatment all or the balance to your credit in a qualifiedtax on the ordinary income part. retirement plan. For information about excep-Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax onCapital gain treatment applies only to the tax-tions to eligible rollover distributions, see Publi-a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-able part of a lump-sum distribution resultingcation 575.ods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added tofrom participation in the plan before 1974. The
the regular tax figured on your other income.amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20%Rollover of nontaxable amounts.You mayThis may result in a smaller tax than you wouldrate. You can elect this treatment only once forbe able to roll over the nontaxable part of apay by including the taxable amount of the distri-any plan participant, and only if the plan partici-distribution (such as your after-tax contributions)bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-pant was born before January 2, 1936. made to another qualified retirement plan orlar tax. Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose thetraditional IRA. The transfer must be made ei-20% capital gain election. For more information,ther through a direct rollover to a qualified plansee Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-SumHow to treat the distribution.If you receive a that separately accounts for the taxable andDistributions in Publication 575.lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow- nontaxable parts of the rollover or through aing options for how you treat the taxable part. rollover to a traditional IRA.
If you roll over only part of a distribution that• Report the part of the distribution from par-10-Year Tax Option includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if
the amount you roll over is treated as comingyou qualify) and the part from participationThe 10-year tax option is a special formula used
first from the taxable part of the distribution.after 1973 as ordinary income. to figure a separate tax on the ordinary income
part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax• Report the part of the distribution from par- Direct rollover option.You can choose toonly once, for the year in which you receive theticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri-distribution, not over the next 10 years. You canyou qualify) and use the 10-year tax option bution paid directly to another qualified plan (ifelect this treatment only once for any plan par-to figure the tax on the part from partici- permitted) or to a traditional IRA. If you decideticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornpation after 1973 (if you qualify). on a rollover, it is generally to your advantage tobefore January 2, 1936.
choose this direct rollover option. Under this• Use the 10-year tax option to figure the taxThe ordinary income part of the distribution is
option, the plan administrator would not withholdon the total taxable amount (if you qualify).the amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R
tax from any part of the distribution that is di-given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if• Roll over all or part of the distribution. See rectly paid to the other plan.any, shown in box 3. You also can treat theRollovers, later. No tax is currently due oncapital gain part of the distribution (box 3 ofthe part rolled over. Report any part notForm 1099-R) as ordinary income for the Withholding tax.If you choose to have all orrolled over as ordinary income. 10-year tax option if you do not choose capital any part of the distribution paid to you, it is
• Report the entire taxable part of the distri-gain treatment for that part. taxable in the year distributed unless you roll it
bution as ordinary income on your tax re-Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose the over to another qualified plan or to a traditional
turn. 10-year tax option. You must use the special tax IRA within 60 days. The plan administrator must
rates shown in the instructions for Part III to withhold income tax of 20% from the amount of
The first three options are explained in thefigure the tax. Publication 575 illustrates how to the distribution paid to you. (See Pensions and
following discussions. complete Form 4972 to figure the separate tax.Annuities under Withholding in chapter 4.)
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 73

Page 76 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you decide to roll over an amountEven if you do not owe any of these taxes,• Made because you are totally and perma-
equal to the distribution before with-you may have to complete Form 5329 and at- nently disabled, or
holding, your contribution to the newtach it to your Form 1040. This applies if youCAUTION
!
• Made on or after the death of the planplan or IRA must include other money (for exam-meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-participant or contract holder.ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-tions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does not
place the amount withheld. indicate an exception. Additional exceptions for qualified retire-The administrator must give you a written ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-explanation of your distribution options within aTax on Early Distributionsbutions that are:reasonable period of time before making an eli-
gible rollover distribution. • From a qualified retirement plan (otherMost distributions (both periodic and nonperi-
than an IRA) if you separated from serviceodic) from qualified retirement plans and non-Rollover by surviving spouse.You may be in or after the year you reached age 55,qualified annuity contracts made to you beforeable to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional• From a qualified retirement plan (othertion from a qualified retirement plan you receivetax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of thethan an IRA) to an alternate payee underas the surviving spouse of a deceased em-distribution that you must include in gross in-a qualified domestic relations order,ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if youcome.were the employee. You can roll over a distribu- • From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-For this purpose, a qualified retirement plantion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi- tent you have deductible medical ex-is:tional IRA. penses (medical expenses that exceed• A qualified employee plan,A beneficiary other than the employee’s sur- 7.5% of your adjusted gross income),
viving spouse cannot roll over a distribution. whether or not you itemize your deduc-• A qualified employee annuity plan,
tions for the year,Alternate payee under qualified domestic re-• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or
• From an employer plan under a writtenlations order.You may be able to roll over tax• An eligible state or local government sec-election that provides a specific schedulefree all or part of a distribution from a qualifiedtion 457 deferred compensation plan (to for distribution of your entire interest if, asretirement plan that you receive under a quali-the extent that any distribution is attributa-of March 1, 1986, you had separated fromfied domestic relations order (QDRO). If youble to amounts the plan received in a di-service and had begun receiving pay-receive the distribution as an employee’s rect transfer or rollover from one of thements under the election,spouse or former spouse (not as a nonspousalother plans listed here).beneficiary), the rollover rules apply to you as if • From an employee stock ownership planyou were the employee. You can roll over the for dividends on employer securities helddistribution from the plan into a traditional IRA or5% rate on certain early distributions from by the plan, orto another eligible retirement plan. See Publica-deferred annuity contracts.If an early with-
• From a qualified retirement plan due to antion 575 for more information on benefits re- drawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-
IRS levy of the plan.ceived under a QDRO. ject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate may
apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions
Additional exceptions for nonqualified an-Retirement bonds. If you redeem a retire-under a written election providing a specific
nuity contracts.The tax does not apply toment bond purchased under a qualified bondschedule for the distribution of your interest in
distributions that are:purchase plan, you can defer the tax on thethe contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you had
amount received that exceeds your basis bybegun receiving payments under the election.• From a deferred annuity contract to therolling it over to an IRA or qualified employerOn line 4 of Form 5329, multiply by 5% insteadextent allocable to investment in the con-plan as discussed in Publication 590. of 10%. Attach an explanation to your return.tract before August 14, 1982,
Exceptions to tax.Certain early distributions• From a deferred annuity contract under a
are excepted from the early distribution tax. Ifqualified personal injury settlement,
the payer knows that an exception applies toSpecial Additional • From a deferred annuity contract pur-your early distribution, distribution code “2,” “3,”
chased by your employer upon terminationor “4” should be shown in box 7 of your FormTaxes of a qualified employee plan or qualified1099-R and you do not have to report the distri-
employee annuity plan and held by yourbution on Form 5329. If an exception applies butTo discourage the use of pension funds for pur- employer until your separation from serv-distribution code “1” (early distribution, noposes other than normal retirement, the law im- ice, orknown exception) is shown in box 7, you mustposes additional taxes on early distributions offile Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of the• From an immediate annuity contract (athose funds and on failures to withdraw thedistribution shown in box 2a of your Form single premium contract providing sub-funds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterstantially equal annuity payments that startthese taxes if you roll over all early distributionsthe amount that can be excluded and the excep-within one year from the date of purchaseyou receive, as explained earlier, and begintion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc- and are paid at least annually).drawing out the funds at a normal retirementtions.age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex-
If distribution code “1” is incorrectlypectancy. These special additional taxes are the
Tax on Excessshown on your Form 1099-R for ataxes on:
distribution received when you were
TIP
Accumulations• Early distributions, and age 591/2 or older, include that distribution on
• Excess accumulation (not receiving mini-Form 5329. Enter exception number “11” on lineTo make sure that most of your retirement bene-
mum distributions). 2. fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather
than to your beneficiaries after your death, theThese taxes are discussed in the following sec-General exceptions.The tax does not ap-payments that you receive from qualified retire-tions. ply to distributions that are: ment plans must begin no later than your re-
If you must pay either of these taxes, report• Made as part of a series of substantiallyquired beginning date (defined next). The
them on Form 5329. However, you do not have equal periodic payments (made at leastpayments each year cannot be less than the
to file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early annually) for your life (or life expectancy)minimum required distribution.
distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
shows a “1” in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the of you and your designated beneficiary (ifRequired beginning date.Unless the rule for
taxable part of the distribution on Form 1040, from a qualified retirement plan, the pay- 5% owners applies, you must begin to receive
line 60 and write “No” under the heading “Other ments must begin after your separation distributions from your qualified retirement plan
Taxes” to the left of line 60. from service), by April 1 of the year that follows the later of:
Page 74 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 77 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an- the same exclusion percentage to your initial• The calendar year in which you reach age nuity, your entire benefit accruing aftersurvivor annuity payment called for in the con-701/2, or 1986) over your life or life expectancy ortract. The resulting tax-free amount will then
• The calendar year in which you retire fromover the joint lives or joint life expectan-remain fixed for future payments. Any increases
employment with the employer maintain- cies of you and a designated beneficiaryin the survivor annuity are fully taxable.
ing the plan. (or over a shorter period). If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-
However, your plan may require you to begin to ments under the Simplified Method, the part ofAdditional information.For more informa-receive distributions by April 1 of the year that each payment that is tax free is the same as thetion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula-follows the year in which you reach age 701/2, tax-free amount figured by the retiree at thetion in Publication 575.even if you have not retired. annuity starting date. See Simplified Method,
Required distributions not made.If the earlier.For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan
actual distributions to you in any year are lessincludes a: If you are the survivor of an employee, orthan the minimum required distribution, you areformer employee, who died before becoming1. Qualified employee plan, subject to an additional excise tax. The taxentitled to any annuity payments, you must fig-equals 50% of the part of the minimum required2. Qualified employee annuity plan, ure the taxable and tax-free parts of your annuitydistribution that was not distributed. You can getpayments using the method that applies as if3. Section 457 deferred compensation plan,this excise tax waived if you establish that theyou were the employee.or shortfall in distributions was due to reasonable
error and that you are taking reasonable steps to4. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits ac-
remedy the shortfall. Estate tax.If your annuity was a joint andcruing after 1986).
survivor annuity that was included in theState insurer delinquency proceedings. decedent’s estate, an estate tax may have beenAge 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date You might not receive the minimum distributionthat is 6 calendar months after the date of your paid on it. You can deduct, as a miscellaneousbecause of state insurer delinquency proceed-70th birthday. itemized deduction, the part of the total estateings for an insurance company. If your pay-For example, if you are retired and your 70th tax that was based on the annuity. This deduc-ments are reduced below the minimum due tobirthday was on June 30, 2005, you were age tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjustedthese proceedings, you should contact your plan701/2 on December 30, 2005. If your 70th birth- gross-income limit. The deceased annuitantadministrator. Under certain conditions, you willday was on July 1, 2005, you reached age 701/2 must have died after the annuity starting date.not have to pay the excise tax.on January 1, 2006. (For details, see section 1.691(d)-1 of the regu-
Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 iflations.) This amount cannot be deducted in one5% owners. If you are a 5% owner of theyou owe a tax because you did not receive ayear. It must be deducted in equal amounts overcompany maintaining your qualified retirementminimum required distribution from your quali-plan, you must begin to receive distributions by your remaining life expectancy.fied retirement plan.April 1 of the calendar year that follows the year If the decedent died before the annuity start-in which you reach age 701/2, regardless of when ing date of a deferred annuity contract and youyou retire. receive a death benefit under that contract, the
amount you receive (either in a lump sum or asRequired distributions.By the required be-
Survivorsginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei- periodic payments) in excess of the decedent’s
ther: cost is included in your gross income as incomeIf you receive a survivor annuity because of thein respect of a decedent for which you may be• Receive your entire interest in the plan (fordeath of a retiree who had reported the annuityable to claim an estate tax deduction.a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefitunder the Three-Year Rule, include the total
accruing after 1986), or See Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,received in income.
and Administrators, for more information on theIf the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-• Begin receiving periodic distributions in estate tax deduction.annual amounts calculated to distribute ments under the General Rule, you must apply
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 75

Page 78 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Tier 2 benefits, benefits, you may have to file a return even if
none of your benefits are taxable.• Vested dual benefits, and
11. • Supplemental annuity benefits. Base amount. Your base amount is:
For information on these benefits, see Publica-• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income. hold, or qualifying widow(er),Social Security This chapter also does not cover the tax rules• $25,000 if you are married filing separatelyfor foreign social security benefits. These bene-and lived apart from your spouse for all offits are taxable as annuities, unless they areand Equivalent 2005,exempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social
• $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, orsecurity benefit under a tax treaty.Railroad • $-0- if you are married filing separately
Useful Items and lived with your spouse at any time
Retirement You may want to see: during 2005.
PublicationBenefits Worksheet.   You can use the follow-
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income ing worksheet to figure the amount of
income to compare with your base❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsamount. This is a quick way to check whether(IRAs)Introduction some of your benefits may be taxable.
❏ 915 Social Security and EquivalentThis chapter explains the federal income tax
Railroad Retirement Benefitsrules for social security benefits and equivalent A. Enter the amount from box 5 of all
tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains: your Forms SSA-1099 and
Forms (and Instructions) RRB-1099. Include the full amount• How to figure whether your benefits are of any lump-sum benefit payments❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individualstaxable, received in 2005, for 2005 and
earlier years. (If you received more❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request• How to use the social security benefits than one form, combine theworksheet (with examples), amounts from box 5 and enter the
total.).................. A .• How to report your taxable benefits, and
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop
• How to treat repayments that are more here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
Are Any of Yourthan the benefits you received during the
B. Enter one-half of the amount onyear. line A................... B .Benefits Taxable?
C. Enter your taxable pensions,Social security benefits include monthly survi-
wages, interest, dividends, andTo find out whether any of your benefits may bevor and disability benefits. They do not include
other taxable income......... C .taxable, compare the base amount for your filingsupplemental security income (SSI) payments,
status with the total of:which are not taxable. D. Enter any tax-exempt interest
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits income (such as interest on
1. One-half of your benefits, plus municipal bonds) plus anyare the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad
exclusions from income (listedemployee or beneficiary would have been enti-2. All your other income, including tax-ex-earlier).................. D .tled to receive under the social security system.empt interest.
They are commonly called the social security E. Add lines B, C, and D........ E .When making this comparison, do not re-equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base
duce your other income by any exclusions for:fits. amount  for your filing status. If the amount on line
E equals or is less than the base amount for yourIf you received these benefits during 2005,• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,filing status, none of your benefits are taxable thisyou should have received a Form SSA-1099,
year. If the amount on line E is more than your• Employer-provided adoption benefits,Social Security Benefit Statement, or Form base amount, some of your benefits may beRRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire- • Foreign earned income or foreign housing,taxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 inment Board, (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security Publication 915 (or the Social Security BenefitsorBenefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S State- Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet).• Income earned by bona fide residents ofment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay-
American Samoa or Puerto Rico.ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you
are a nonresident alien). These forms show the Example. You and your spouse (both overamounts received and repaid, and taxes with- 65) are filing a joint return for 2005, and you bothFiguring total income.To figure the total ofheld for the year. You may receive more thanone-half of your benefits plus your other income, received social security benefits during the year.one of these forms for the same year. Youuse the worksheet later in this discussion. If theIn January 2006, you received a Formshould add the amounts shown on all forms youtotal is more than your base amount, part of yourSSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in boxreceive for the year to determine the “total”benefits may be taxable. 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. YouIf you are married and file a joint return forheld for that year. See the Appendix at the end 2005, you and your spouse must combine youralso received a taxable pension of $19,000 andof Publication 915 for more information. incomes and your benefits to figure whether anyinterest income of $500. You did not have any
of your combined benefits are taxable. Even iftax-exempt interest income. Your benefits areNote. When the term “benefits” is used inyour spouse did not receive any benefits, younot taxable for 2005 because your income, asthis chapter, it applies to both social securitymust add your spouse’s income to yours to fig-figured in the following worksheet, is not morebenefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroadure whether any of your benefits are taxable.than your base amount ($32,000) for marriedretirement benefits.
filing jointly.If the only income you received duringWhat is not covered in this chapter.This Even though none of your benefits are tax-2005 was your social security or thechapter does not cover the tax rules for the able, you must file a return for 2005 becauseSSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
following railroad retirement benefits: your taxable gross income ($19,500) exceedsment benefits, your benefits generally are not
the minimum filing requirement amount for your• Non-social security equivalent benefittaxable and you probably do not have to file a
filing status.(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits, return. If you have income in addition to your
Page 76 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 79 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form W-4V. You can choose withholding at 7%,Which worksheet to use.A worksheet to fig-
A. Enter the amount from box 5 of 10%, 15%, or 25% of your total benefit payment.ure your taxable benefits is in the instructions for
all your Forms SSA-1099 and If you do not choose to have income taxyour Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can useRRB-1099. Include the full withheld, you may have to request additionaleither that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica-amount of any lump-sum benefit withholding from other income or pay estimatedtion 915, unless any of the following situationspayments received in 2005, for tax during the year. For details, get Publicationapplies to you.2005 and earlier years. (If you
505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or thereceived more than one form,
instructions for Form 1040-ES. 1. You contributed to a traditional individualcombine the amounts from box 5
and enter the total.)........ A . $  11,000 retirement arrangement (IRA) and you or
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop your spouse is covered by a retirement
here; none of your benefits are taxable this year. plan at work. In this situation, you must
use the special worksheets in Appendix BB. Enter one-half of the amount on How To Report
line A................. B . 5,500 of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA
deduction and your taxable benefits.Your BenefitsC. Enter your taxable pensions,
wages, interest, dividends, and 2. Situation (1) does not apply and you takeother taxable income....... C .  19,500 If part of your benefits are taxable, you must usean exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot useD. Enter any tax-exempt interest savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoptionForm 1040EZ.income (such as interest on benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earned
municipal bonds) plus any income or housing (Form 2555 or FormReporting on Form 1040. Report your netexclusions from income (listed 2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formearlier)................. D . - 0 - can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico bySSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a and
E. Add lines B, C, and D....... E . $25,000 bona fide residents. In this situation, youthe taxable part on line 20b. If you are married
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your base must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915filing separately and you lived apart from youramount  for your filing status. If the amount on line to figure your taxable benefits.spouse for all of 2005, also enter “D” to the rightE equals or is less than the base amount for your of the word “benefits” on line 20a.filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this 3. You received a lump-sum payment for an
year. If the amount on line E is more than your earlier year. In this situation, also completeReporting on Form 1040A. Report your netbase amount, some of your benefits may be Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formtaxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1 lication 915. See Lump-sum election.SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a andin Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits
the taxable part on line 14b. If you are marriedWorksheet in your tax form instruction booklet).
filing separately and you lived apart from yourLump-sum election. You must include thespouse for all of 2005, also enter “D” to the righttaxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-Who is taxed. The person who has the legalof the word “benefits” on line 14a. ment of benefits received in 2005 in your 2005right to receive the benefits must determine
income, even if the payment includes benefitsBenefits not taxable.If none of your benefitswhether the benefits are taxable. For example, if
for an earlier year.are taxable, do not report any of them on youryou and your child receive benefits, but the
tax return. But if you are married filing separatelycheck for your child is made out in your name, This type of lump-sum benefit pay-and you lived apart from your spouse for all ofyou must use only your part of the benefits to ment should not be confused with the2005, make the following entries. On Formsee whether any benefits are taxable to you. lump-sum death benefit that both the
TIP
1040, enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits”One-half of the part that belongs to your child SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.on line 20a and “-0-” on line 20b. On Formmust be added to your child’s other income to No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subject1040A, enter “D” to the right of the word “bene-see whether any of those benefits are taxable to to tax.fits” on line 14a and “-0-” on line 14b.your child. Generally, you use your 2005 income to fig-
Repayment of benefits. Any repayment of ure the taxable part of the total benefits received
How Much Is Taxable?benefits you made during 2005 must be sub- in 2005. However, you may be able to figure the
tracted from the gross benefits you received in taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-If part of your benefits are taxable, how much is2005. It does not matter whether the repayment lier year separately, using your income for thetaxable depends on the total amount of yourwas for a benefit you received in 2005 or in an earlier year. You can elect this method if it low-benefits and other income. Generally, the higherearlier year. If you repaid more than the gross ers your taxable benefits.that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofbenefits you received in 2005, see Repayments
Making the election. If you received ayour benefits.More Than Gross Benefits, later.
lump-sum benefit payment in 2005 that includesYour gross benefits are shown in box 3 ofMaximum taxable part.Generally, up to 50%benefits for one or more earlier years, follow theForm SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay- of your benefits will be taxable. However, up toinstructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Summents are shown in box 4. The amount in box 585% of your benefits can be taxable if either ofElection to see whether making the election willshows your net benefits for 2005 (box 3 minusthe following situations applies to you. lower your taxable benefits. That discussionbox 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure
also explains how to make the election.whether any of your benefits are taxable. • The total of one-half of your benefits and
all your other income is more than Because the earlier year’s taxableTax withholding and estimated tax.You can $34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filing benefits are included in your 2005 in-choose to have federal income tax withheld fromjointly). come, no adjustment is made to theyour social security benefits and/or the SSEB CAUTION
!
earlier year’s return. Do not file an amendedportion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits.• You are married filing separately and lived
return for the earlier year.If you choose to do this, you must complete a with your spouse at any time during 2005.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 77

Page 80 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Certain income of bona fide
No.
STOP
None of your benefits are  residents of American
taxable. Do not enter any amounts onExamples  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on Form  or Puerto Rico
1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if you are Form 1040A filers: Enter the total ofThe following are a few examples you can usemarried filing separately and you lived any exclusion for qualified U.S. savingsas a guide to figure the taxable part of yourapart from your spouse for all of 2005, bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or forbenefits. enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or on adoption benefits ( Form 8839, line 30). -0-
Form 1040A, line 14b. 5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4............. 32,550
Yes. Subtract line 8 from line 7...... 6,980Example 1. George White is single and files 6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from
10.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; Form 1040, line 36, minus any amounts onForm 1040 for 2005. He received the following
$9,000 if single, head of household, Form 1040, lines 33, 34, and 35income in 2005: qualifying widow(er), or married filing Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount from
separately and you lived apart from your Form 1040A, line 20, minus any amountsFully taxable pension............. $18,600 spouse for all of 2005............. 9,000 on Form 1040A, lines 18 and 19....... 1,000Wages from part-time job..........  9,400 11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less,7. Is the amount on line 6 less than theTaxable interest income........... 9 9 0 enter -0-..................... - 0 - amount on line 5?Total....................... $28,990 12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10.... 6,980
No.
STOP
None of your benefits are taxable.George also received social security benefits Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5...... 31,55013.Enter one-half of line 12........... 3,490during 2005. The Form SSA-1099 he received in 8. If you are:14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13.... 2,990January 2006 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figure15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 is • Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
his taxable benefits, George completes the zero, enter -0-.................. - 0 - • Single, head of household, qualifying
worksheet shown here. 16.Add lines 14 and 15.............. 2,990 widow(er), or married filing separately
and you lived apart from your spouse17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)......... 5,083
Worksheet 1. for all of 2005, enter $25,000...... 32,00018.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits Note. If you are married filing separatelyline 16 or line 17................ $2,990
and you lived with your spouse at any time• Enter the amount from line 1 above
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL in 2005, skip lines 8 through 15; multiply on Form 1040, line 20a or on
your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . . . $5,980 line 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on Form 1040A, line 14a.
Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here; none line 16. Then go to line 17.• Enter the amount from line 18 above
of your benefits are taxable. Otherwise, go to 9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the on Form 1040, line 20b or on
line 2. amount on line 7? Form 1040A, line 14b.
2. Enter one-half of line 1............ 2,990
No.
STOP
None of your benefits are3. Enter the total of the amounts from:
taxable. Do not enter any amounts onForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10 The amount on line 18 of George’s worksheet
Form 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on Formthrough 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, shows that $2,990 of his social security benefits1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if you areand 21. is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, Georgemarried filing separately and you livedForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10, enters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, heapart from your spouse for all of 2005,11b, 12b, and 13.............. 28,990 enters his taxable benefits of $2,990. enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or on4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any Form 1040A, line 14b.exclusions/adjustments for:
Yes. Subtract line 8 from line 7......Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a• Qualified U.S. savings bond
10.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; interest (Form 8815, line 14), joint return on Form 1040A for 2005. Ray is$9,000 if single, head of household,• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line retired and received a fully taxable pension ofqualifying widow(er), or married filing 30), $15,500. He also received social security bene-separately and you lived apart from your• Foreign earned income or housing fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2004 shows netspouse for all of 2005............. (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and enter -0-.....................the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a• Certain income of bona fide 12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10....deductible payment to her IRA account of residents of American
13.Enter one-half of line 12........... Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) $1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac-
14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13.... or Puerto Rico counts with a total of $250 in interest income.15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 isForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of They complete Worksheet 1 and find that nonezero, enter -0-.................any exclusions for qualified U.S. of Ray’s social security benefits are taxable.16.Add lines 14 and 15..............savings bond interest ( Form 8815, line
They leave lines 14a and 14b of their Form17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85).........14) or for adoption benefits ( Form
1040A blank.8839, line 30)................. - 0 - 18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line
16 or line 17..................5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4............. 31,980
Worksheet 1. • Enter the amount from line 1 above6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits  on Form 1040, line 20a or onForm 1040, line 36, minus any amounts
 Form 1040A, line 14a.on Form 1040, lines 33, 34, and 35
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL • Enter the amount from line 18 aboveForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount
your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 . . $5,600  on Form 1040, line 20b or onfrom Form 1040A, line 20, minus any
Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here; none  Form 1040A, line 14b.amounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and 19. -0-
of your benefits are taxable. Otherwise, go to7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the
line 2.amount on line 5?
2. Enter one-half of line 1............ 2,800 Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file aNo.
STOP
None of your social security benefits are3. Enter the total of the amounts from: joint return on Form 1040 for 2005. Joe is ataxable. Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5...... 31,980 retired railroad worker and in 2005 received thethrough 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and
8. If you are: social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion21.
• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10, of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe’s Form
11b, 12b, and 13.............. 29,750• Single, head of household, qualifying RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is a
widow(er), or married filing separately 4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any retired government worker and receives a fullyand you lived apart from your spouse exclusions/adjustments for: taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 infor all of 2005, enter $25,000...... 25,000 • Qualified U.S. savings bond interest income plus interest of $200 on a quali-Note. If you are married filing separately  interest (Form 8815, line 14),
fied U.S. savings bond. The savings bond inter-and you lived with your spouse at any time • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line
in 2005, skip lines 8 through 15; multiply est qualified for the exclusion. Thus, they have a 30),
line 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on total income of $40,300 ($38,000 + $2,300).• Foreign earned income or housing
line 16. Then go to line 17.  (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or They figure their taxable benefits by completing9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the  Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and Worksheet 1.amount on line 7?
Page 78 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 81 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 13 . . . 5,000Worksheet 1. Joint return.If you and your spouse file a joint
15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line 11 isFiguring Your Taxable Benefits return, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099zero, enter -0-................ 1,275 has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse’s16.Add lines 14 and 15............. 6,2751. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL
does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of youryour Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 $10,000 17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)........ 8,500
form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse’sNote. If line 1 is zero or less, stop here; none18. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of
of your benefits are taxable. Otherwise, go to line 16 or line 17............... $6,275 form. You do this to get your net benefits when
line 2. • Enter the amount from line 1 above figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.2. Enter one-half of line 1........... 5,000  on Form 1040, line 20a or on
 Form 1040A, line 14a.3. Enter the total of the amounts from:
Example. John and Mary file a joint return• Enter the amount from line 18 aboveForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10
for 2005. John received Form SSA-1099 show- on Form 1040, line 20b or onthrough 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19,
 Form 1040A, line 14b.and 21. ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form
Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9a, 10, SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).11b, 12b, and 13............. 40,300 John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minusMore than 50% of Joe’s net benefits are tax-4. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any
$500) as the amount of their net benefits whenexclusions/adjustments for: able because the income on line 7 of the work-
• Qualified U.S. savings bond figuring if any of their combined benefits aresheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and
 interest (Form 8815, line 14), taxable.Betty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, and• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line $6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b. 30),
• Foreign earned income or housing Repayment of benefits received in an earlier
 (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48, or year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of all Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a• Certain income of bona fide Deductions Related to negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc- residents of American
 Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) tion for the part of this negative figure that repre-
Your Benefits or Puerto Rico sents benefits you included in gross income inForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of an earlier year.any exclusions for qualified U.S. You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts
savings bond interest (Form 8815, line Deduction $3,000 or less.If this deductionrelated to the benefits you receive.14) or for adoption benefits (Form is $3,000 or less, it is subject to the8839, line 30)................ 2 0 0
Disability payments.You may have received 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4............ 45,500
disability payments from your employer or an6. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from to certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.
insurance company that you included as incomeForm 1040, line 36, minus any amounts Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.on Form 1040, lines 33, 34, and 35 on your tax return in an earlier year. If you
Deduction more than $3,000.If this deduc-Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount received a lump-sum payment from SSA or
from Form 1040A, line 20, minus any tion is more than $3,000, you should figure yourRRB, and you had to repay the employer oramounts on Form 1040A, lines 18 and tax two ways:insurance company for the disability payments,1 9 . ....................... - 0 -
you can take an itemized deduction for the part7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the
1. Figure your tax for 2005 with the itemizedof the payments you included in gross income inamount on line 5?
the earlier year. If the amount you repay is morededuction included on Schedule A line 27.No.
STOP
None of your benefits are taxable. than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxYes. Subtract line 6 from line 5..... 45,500 2. Figure your tax for 2005 in the followingcredit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in8.  . If you are: steps.the same way explained under Repayments• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
More Than Gross Benefits, later. a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-• Single, head of household, qualifying
widow(er), or married filing duction included on Schedule A line 27.Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le-separately and you lived apart from
your spouse for all of 2005, enter b. For each year after 1983 for which partgal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or
$25,000 ................. 32,000 collect taxable income or in connection with theof the negative figure represents a re-
Note. If you are married filing separately determination, collection, or refund of any tax.payment of benefits, refigure your tax-and you lived with your spouse at any Legal expenses for collecting the taxable able benefits as if your total benefits fortime in 2005, skip lines 8 through 15;
part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-the year were reduced by that part ofmultiply line 7 by 85% (.85) and enter the
result on line 16. Then go to line 17 laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A the negative figure. Then refigure the
9. Is the amount on line 8 less than the (Form 1040), line 22. tax for that year.amount on line 7?
c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax
No.
STOP
None of your benefits are Repayments More Than amounts in (b) from the total of yourtaxable. Do not enter any amounts on
actual tax amounts.Gross BenefitsForm 1040, line 20a or 20b, or on Form
1040A, line 14a or 14b. But if you are d. Subtract the result in (c) from the resultmarried filing separately and you lived In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 or in (a).apart from your spouse for all of 2005, Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits
enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or on you repaid (box 4) are more than the grossForm 1040A, line 14b. Compare the tax figured in methods (1) andbenefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,Yes. Subtract line 8 from line 7..... 13,500 (2). Your tax for 2005 is the smaller of the twoyour net benefits in box 5 will be a negative10.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takefigure (a figure in parentheses) and none of your$9,000 if single, head of household,
the itemized deduction on line 27, Schedule Aqualifying widow(er), or married filing benefits will be taxable. If you receive more than
separately and you lived apart from your (Form 1040). If method (2) results in less tax,one form, a negative figure in box 5 of one form
spouse for all of 2005............ 12,000 claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)is used to offset a positive figure in box 5 of11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or above on Form 1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C.another form for that same year.less, enter -0-................. 1,500
1341” in the margin to the left of line 70. If bothIf you have any questions about this negative12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10 . . . 12,000
methods produce the same tax, deduct the re-figure, contact your local SSA office or your local13.Enter one-half of line 12.......... 6,000
RRB field office. payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 79

Page 82 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
scrip you received from exchanges during 2005.Useful Items
The IRS will also receive a copy of Form 1099-B.You may want to see:
12. Publication
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Canceled Debts
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Other Income Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled orAssets
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. You have no income from the canceled
What’s New debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
includes any indebtedness for which you are
liable or which attaches to property you hold.Disaster mitigation payments.You can ex-
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report theclude from income grants you use to mitigateBartering canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a(reduce the severity of) potential damage from
business debt, report the amount on Schedule Cfuture natural disasters that is paid to youBartering is an exchange of property or services.or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedulethrough state and local governments. If you re-You must include in your income, at the timeF, Profit or Loss From Farming (Form 1040), ifported income from qualified disaster mitigationreceived, the fair market value of property orthe debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).payments in previous years, you may be able toservices you receive in bartering. If you ex-
file a claim for refund. For more information, seechange services with another person and youForm 1099-C. If a Federal GovernmentDisaster mitigation payments under Welfare and both have agreed ahead of time as to the valueagency, financial institution, or credit unionOther Public Assistance Benefits. of the services, that value will be accepted ascancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orfair market value unless the value can be shownmore, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.to be otherwise. tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isThis Act provides tax relief for persons affectedGenerally, you report this income on Sched-shown in box 2.by Hurricane Katrina. Under this Act, you mayule C, Profit or Loss From Business, or Schedulebe able to exclude from income canceled non- Interest included in canceled debt.If anyC-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Form 1040).business debt. See Publication 4492. interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofHowever, if the barter involves an exchange of
canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestsomething other than services, such as in Ex-
will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not youample 3 below, you may have to use another
must include the interest portion of the canceledform or schedule instead.
debt in your income depends on whether theIntroduction
interest would be deductible if you paid it. SeeExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-You must include on your return all income you Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.ney who performs legal services for a client, a
receive in the form of money, property, and If the interest would not be deductible (suchsmall corporation. The corporation gives you
services unless the tax law states that you do as interest on a personal loan), include in yourshares of its stock as payment for your services.
not include them. Some items, however, are income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. IfYou must include the fair market value of the
only partly excluded from income. This chapter the interest would be deductible (such as on ashares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-
discusses many kinds of income and explains business loan), include in your income the netule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive
whether they are taxable or nontaxable. amount of the canceled debt (the amount shownthem.
in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
• Income that is taxable must be reported 3).Example 2. You are self-employed and aon your tax return and is subject to tax.member of a barter club. The club uses “credit
Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialunits” as a means of exchange. It adds credit• Income that is nontaxable may have to be
institution offers a discount for the early paymentunits to your account for goods or services youshown on your tax return but is not tax-
of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-provide to members, which you can use toable.
count is canceled debt. You must include thepurchase goods or services offered by other
canceled amount in your income.members of the barter club. The club subtractsThis chapter begins with discussions of the
credit units from your account when you receivefollowing income items.
Mortgage relief upon sale or othergoods or services from other members. You
disposition.If you are personally liable for a• Bartering. must include in your income the value of the
mortgage (recourse debt), and you are relievedcredit units that are added to your account, even• Canceled debts. of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-though you may not actually receive goods or
erty, you may realize gain or loss up to the fair• Host or Hostess. services from other members until a later tax
market value of the property. To the extent theyear.• Life insurance proceeds. mortgage discharge exceeds the fair market
• Partnership income. value of the property, it is income from dischargeExample 3. You own a small apartment
of indebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusionbuilding. In return for 6 months rent-free use of• S Corporation income. under Excluded debt, later. Report any incomean apartment, an artist gives you a work of art
• Recoveries (including state income tax re- from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusinessshe created. You must report as rental income
debt that does not qualify for exclusion as otherfunds). on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss
income on Form 1040, line 21.(Form 1040), the fair market value of the art-• Rents from personal property. work, and the artist must report as income onIf you are not personally liable for a mortgage
• Repayments. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) the(nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of the
fair rental value of the apartment. mortgage when you dispose of the property• Royalties. (such as through foreclosure or repossession),
• Unemployment benefits. that relief is included in the amount you realize.Form 1099-B from barter exchange.If you
You may have a taxable gain if the amount youexchanged property or services through a barter• Welfare and other public assistance bene- realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Brokerfits. erty. Report any gain on nonbusiness propertyand Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar
These discussions are followed by brief discus- as a capital gain.statement from the barter exchange should be
sions of other income items arranged in alpha-sent to you by January 31, 2006. It should show See Foreclosures and Repossessions in
betical order. the value of cash, property, services, credits, or Publication 544 for more information.
Page 80 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 83 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in applies only if you use the cash method of ac-Proceeds not received in installments.If
a corporation and the corporation cancels or counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or
forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. other than at regular intervals, include in your
constructive distribution that is generally divi- income only the benefits that are more than theEducation loan repayment assistance.dend income to you. For more information, see amount payable to you at the time of the insuredEducation loan repayments made to you by thePublication 542, Corporations. person’s death. If the benefit payable at death isNational Health Service Corps Loan RepaymentIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and not specified, you include in your income theProgram (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) oryou cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- benefit payments that are more than the presenta state education loan repayment program eligi-tion, you generally do not realize income. This is value of the payments at the time of death.ble for funds under the Public Health Service Actbecause the canceled debt is considered as aare not taxable if you agree to provide primaryProceeds received in installments.If you re-contribution to the capital of the corporationhealth services in health professional shortageceive life insurance proceeds in installments,equal to the amount of debt principal that youareas. For more information, see Publicationyou can exclude part of each installment fromcanceled. 970, Tax Benefits for Education. your income.
Repayment of canceled debt.If you included To determine the excluded part, divide thePrice reduced after purchase.Generally, ifa canceled amount in your income and later pay amount held by the insurance company (gener-the seller reduces the amount of debt you owethe debt, you may be able to file a claim for ally the total lump sum payable at the death offor property you purchased, you do not haverefund for the year the amount was included in the insured person) by the number of install-income from the reduction. The reduction of theincome. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if ments to be paid. Include anything over thisdebt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentthe statute of limitations for filing a claim is still excluded part in your income as interest.and reduces your basis in the property.open. The statute of limitations generally does
Surviving spouse. If your spouse diednot end until 3 years after the due date of your
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-Excluded debt. Do not include a canceledoriginal return.
ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourdebt in your gross income in the following situa-
spouse are received in installments, you cantions.
Exceptions exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy casecluded in the installments. If you remarry, youunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-There are several exceptions to the inclusion of can continue to take the exclusion.cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.canceled debt in income. These are explained
More information. For more information,next. • The debt is canceled when you are insol-see Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.vent. However, you cannot exclude anyStudent loans. Certain student loans contain
amount of canceled debt that is more thana provision that all or part of the debt incurred to Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-
the amount by which you are insolvent.attend the qualified educational institution will be der a life insurance policy for cash, you must
See Publication 908.canceled if you work for a certain period of time include in income any proceeds that are more
in certain professions for any of a broad class of than the cost of the life insurance policy. In• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
employers. general, your cost (or investment in the contract)celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3
You do not have income if your student loan is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeof Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.
is canceled after you agreed to this provision insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,
• The debt is qualified real property busi-and then performed the services required. To rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were
ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationqualify, the loan must have been made by: not included in your income.
334.  You should receive a Form 1099-R showing1. The Federal Government, a state or local the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report• The cancellation is intended as a gift.government, or an instrumentality, agency, these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formor subdivision thereof, 1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
that has assumed control of a state, Endowment ContractHost or Hostesscounty, or municipal hospital, and whose
Proceedsemployees are considered public employ-
If you host a party at which sales are made, anyees under state law, or
An endowment contract is a policy under whichgift you receive for giving the party is a payment3. An educational institution: you are paid a specified amount of money on afor helping a direct seller make sales. You must
certain date unless you die before that date, inreport it as income at its fair market value.a. Under an agreement with an entity de- which case, the money is paid to your desig-Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainmentfunds to the institution to make the loan, a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifexpenses. These expenses are deductible asor the proceeds are more than the cost of themiscellaneous itemized deductions subject to
policy. To determine your cost, subtract anyb. As part of a program of the institutionthe 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),
amount that you previously received under thedesigned to encourage students to but only up to the amount of income you receive
contract and excluded from your income fromserve in occupations or areas with un-for giving the party.
the total premiums (or other consideration) paidmet needs and under which the serv- For more information about the 50% limit for
for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumices provided are for or under the meal and entertainment expenses, see 50%
payment that is more than your cost in yourdirection of a governmental unit or aLimit in chapter 26.
income.tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-
tion.
Accelerated DeathSection 501(c)(3) organizations are definedLife Insurance Benefitsin Publication 525.
A loan to refinance a qualified student loanProceeds Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-will also qualify if it was made by an educational
efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalinstitution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organizationLife insurance proceeds paid to you because ofsettlement before the insured’s death are ex-under its program designed as described inthe death of the insured person are not taxablecluded from income if the insured is terminally or(3)(b) above. unless the policy was turned over to you for achronically ill.
price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidDeductible debt. You do not have income
under an accident or health insurance policy orfrom the cancellation of a debt if your payment of Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-
an endowment contract.the debt would be deductible. This exception ment of any part of the death benefit under a life
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 81

Page 84 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- the partners based on each partner’s distributive come because they are never allowed as a
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person share of these items. deduction from income.
who regularly engages in the business of buying State tax refund.If you received a state orSchedule K-1 (Form 1065).Although a part-or taking assignment of life insurance contracts local income tax refund (or credit or offset) innership generally pays no tax, it must file anon the lives of insured individuals who are termi- 2005, you generally must include it in income ifinformation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return ofnally or chronically ill and who meets the require- you deducted the tax in an earlier year. ThePartnership Income, and send Schedule K-1ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, theRevenue Code. ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2006.partnership will send each partner a copy of the
The IRS also will receive a copy of the FormExclusion for terminal illness.  AcceleratedPartner’s Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form
1099-G. Use the State and Local Income Taxdeath benefits are fully excludable if the insured1065) to help each partner report his or her
Refund worksheet in the 2005 Form 1040 in-is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whoshare of the partnership’s income, deductions,
structions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any)has been certified by a physician as having ancredits, and tax preference items.
to include in your income.illness or physical condition that can reasonablyKeep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) for For 2004 you could choose to deduct:be expected to result in death within 24 months your records. Do not attach it to yourfrom the date of the certification.
• State and local income taxes, orForm 1040.RECORDS
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insured • State and local general sales taxes.For more information on partnerships, see
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallyPublication 541, Partnerships.
For 2005, the refund that you must include inill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis
income is limited to the excess of the tax youof costs incurred for qualified long-term care
chose to deduct over the tax you did not chooseservices are fully excludable. Accelerated death
to deduct. For examples, see Publication 525.benefits paid on a per diem or other periodicS Corporation Incomebasis are excludable up to a limit. This limit Mortgage interest refund.If you received aapplies to the total of the accelerated deathIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax onrefund or credit in 2005 of mortgage interest paidbenefits and any periodic payments receivedits income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-in an earlier year, the amount should be shownfrom long-term care insurance contracts. Fortions, and credits of the corporation are passedin box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestinformation on the limit and the definitions ofthrough to the shareholders based on eachStatement. Do not subtract the refund amountchronically ill individual, qualified long-term careshareholder’s pro rata share. from the interest you paid in 2005. You mayservices, and long-term care insurance con- have to include it in your income under the rulestracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).An S corpora- explained in the following discussions.tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S.chapter 5. Interest on recovery.Interest on any of theIncome Tax Return for an S Corporation, and
amounts you recover must be reported as inter-send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to eachException. The exclusion does not apply to est income in the year received. For example,shareholder. In addition, the S corporation willany amount paid to a person (other than the report any interest you received on state or localsend each shareholder a copy of theinsured) who has an insurable interest in the life income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.Shareholder’s Instructions for Schedule K-1of the insured because the insured: (Form 1120S) to help each shareholder reportRecovery and expense in same year.If the• Is a director, officer, or employee of thehis or her share of the S corporation’s income,refund or other recovery and the expense occurperson, or losses, credits, and deductions. in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
• Has a financial interest in the person’s duction or credit and is not reported as income.Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for
business. your records. Do not attach it to yourRecovery for 2 or more years.If you receiveForm 1040.RECORDS
a refund or other recovery that is for amounts
For more information on S corporations andForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must
their shareholders, see Instructions for Formated death benefits made on a per diem or other allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered
1120S.periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer amount between the years in which you paid it.
MSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con- This allocation is necessary to determine the
tracts, with your return. You do not have to file amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene- determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
fits paid on the basis of actual expenses in- deduction for this item for the current year. ForRecoveriescurred. information on how to compute the allocation,
see Recoveries in Publication 525.A recovery is a return of an amount you de-
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. ThePublic Safety Officer Killed
most common recoveries are refunds, reim-Itemized Deductionin the Line of Duty bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized
Recoverieson Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may haveIf you are a survivor of a public safety officer whorecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such aswas killed in the line of duty, you may be able to If you recover any amount that you deducted inpayments on previously deducted bad debts)exclude from income certain amounts you re- an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youand recoveries of items for which you previouslyceive. generally must include the full amount of theclaimed a tax credit.   For this purpose, the term public safety recovery in your income in the year you receive
officer includes law enforcement officers, it.Tax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryfirefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad andin your income in the year you receive it up to theWhere to report.Enter your state or local in-ambulance crew members. For more informa-amount by which the deduction or credit youcome tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and thetion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,took for the recovered amount reduced your taxtotal of all other recoveries as other income onand Administrators. in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040A
crease to an amount carried over to the currentor Form 1040EZ.
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is
Standard deduction limit.You generally areconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you doPartnership Income lier year. For more information, see Publication
not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized525.
A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. deductions that are more than your standard
The income, gains, losses, deductions, andFederal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
credits of a partnership are passed through to eral income taxes are not included in your in- less you are required to itemize your deduc-
Page 82 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 85 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year your 2004 expenses. The only amount of theType of deduction.The type of deduction you
return were not more than your income for that $500 reimbursement that must be included in are allowed in the year of repayment depends
year, include in your income this year the lesser your income for 2005 is $200—the amount ac- on the type of income you included in the earlier
of: tually deducted. year. You generally deduct the repayment on
the same form or schedule on which you previ-• Your recoveries, or Other recoveries.See Recoveries in Publica-ously reported it as income. For example, if you
tion 525 if:• The amount by which your itemized de- reported it as self-employment income, deduct it
ductions exceeded the standard deduc- as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-• You have recoveries of items other than
tion. ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formitemized deductions, or
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deduct
• You received a recovery for an item forit as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). IfExample. For 2004, you filed a joint return.which you claimed a tax credit (other thanyou reported it as wages, unemployment com-Your taxable income was $60,000 and you wereinvestment credit or foreign tax credit) in apensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductnot entitled to any tax credits. Your standardprior year. it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction ondeduction was $9,700, and you had itemized Schedule A (Form 1040).deductions of $11,000. In 2005, you received
the following recoveries for amounts deducted Repayment of $3,000 or less.If the amounton your 2004 return: you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from
Rents from Personal your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustMedical expenses.............. $200 deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0 Property enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22.Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 5
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-Total recoveries................ $925 Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you
ment or vehicles, how you report your incomerepaid was more than $3,000, you can deductNone of the recoveries were more than the de-and expenses is generally determined by: the repayment (as explained under Type of de-ductions taken for 2004. The difference between duction, earlier). However, you can instead• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-the state and local income tax you deducted and choose to take a tax credit for the year of repay-ness, andyour local general sales tax was more than ment if you included the income under a claim of$400. • Whether or not the rental activity is con-right. This means that at the time you includedYour total recoveries are less than the ducted for profit. the income, it appeared that you had an un-amount by which your itemized deductions ex- restricted right to it. If you qualify for this choice,Generally, if your primary purpose is income orceeded the standard deduction ($11,000 − figure your tax under both methods and com-profit and you are involved in the rental activity9,700 = $1,300), so you must include your total pare the results. Use the method (deduction orwith continuity and regularity, your rental activityrecoveries in your income for 2005. Report the credit) that results in less tax.is a business. See Publication 535, Businessstate and local income tax refund of $400 on
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses forForm 1040, line 10, and the balance of your Method 1. Figure your tax for 2005 claiming
both business and not-for-profit activities.recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,Standard deduction for earlier years.To de- Reporting business income and expenses. enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.termine if amounts recovered in 2005 must beIf you are in the business of renting personal
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2005 claimingincluded in your income, you must know theproperty, report your income and expenses on
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow thesestandard deduction for your filing status for theSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The
steps.year the deduction was claimed. Standard de-form instructions have information on how to
duction amounts for 2004, 2003, and 2002 are incomplete them. 1. Figure your tax for 2005 without deductingPublication 525.
the repaid amount.Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are
Example. You filed a joint return for 2004not in the business of renting personal property,2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemizedreport your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.without including in income the amount
deductions were $10,350. The standard deduc-List the type and amount of the income on theyou repaid in 2005.
tion that you could have claimed was $9,700. Indotted line next to line 21.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown2005 you recovered $2,100 of your 2004 item-
on your return for the earlier year. This isReporting nonbusiness expenses. If youized deductions. None of the recoveries were
the credit.rent personal property for profit, include yourmore than the actual deductions for 2004. In-
rental expenses in the total amount you enter onclude $650 of the recoveries in your 2005 in- 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forForm 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount andcome. This is the smaller of your recoveries 2005 figured without the deduction (Step“PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36.($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized 1).If you do not rent personal property for profit,deductions were more than the standard deduc-
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theyour deductions are limited and you cannot re-tion ($10,350 − 9,700 = $650).
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,port a loss to offset other income. See  Activity
Recovery limited to deduction.You do not claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formnot for profit, under Other Income, later.
include in your income any amount of your re- 1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C. 1341” next to line
covery that is more than the amount you de- 70.
ducted in the earlier year. The amount you An example of this computation can be found
include in your income is limited to the smaller in Publication 525.Repaymentsof:
Repaid social security benefits.If you re-If you had to repay an amount that you included• The amount deducted on Schedule A paid social security benefits, see Repayment ofin your income in an earlier year, you may be(Form 1040), or benefits in chapter 11.able to deduct the amount repaid from your• The amount recovered. income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
Example. During 2004 you paid $1,700 for may be able to take a credit against your tax for
medical expenses. From this amount you sub- the year in which you repaid it. Generally, youRoyalties
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
gross income. Your actual medical expense de- ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,
duction was $200. In 2005, you received a $500 your trade or business or in a for-profit transac- and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary
reimbursement from your medical insurance for tion. income.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 83

Page 86 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You generally report royalties in Part I ofUnemployment compensation. You must in- for income tax. They may be subject to social
security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold clude in your income all unemployment compen-
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsan operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in sation you receive. You should receive a Form
in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer’sbusiness as a self-employed writer, inventor, 1099-G, Certain Government Payments, show-
Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay-artist, etc., report your income and expenses on ing the amount paid to you. Generally, you enter
ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). unemployment compensation on line 19 of Form
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form
Copyrights and patents. Royalties from 1040EZ. Repayment of benefits.You may have tocopyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, repay some of your supplemental unemploy-Types of unemployment compensation.and similar property, or from patents on inven- ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentUnemployment compensation generally in-tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youcludes any amount received under an unem-your work over a specified period of time. Royal- repay supplemental unemployment benefits inployment compensation law of the United Statesties generally are based on the number of units the same year you receive them, reduce theor of a state. It includes the following benefits.sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a total benefits by the amount you repay. If youperformance, or machines sold. • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofrepay the benefits in a later year, you must
Columbia from the Federal Unemploymentinclude the full amount of the benefits receivedOil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from Trust Fund. in your income for the year you received them.oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount Deduct the repayment in the later year as an• State unemployment insurance benefits.you receive when natural resources are ex- adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youtracted from your property. The royalties are• Railroad unemployment compensation cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-based on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andbenefits. clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, andare paid to you by a person or company who enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the• Disability payments from a governmentleases the property from you. dotted line next to line 36. If the amount youprogram paid as a substitute for unem-
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, youDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco- ployment compensation. (Amounts re-
may be able to take a credit against your tax fornomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gasceived as workers’ compensation for
the later year instead of deducting the amountwells, you can recover your investment throughinjuries or illness are not unemployment
repaid. For more information on this, see Repay-the depletion allowance. For information on thiscompensation. See chapter 5 for more in-
ments, earlier.subject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. formation.)
Coal and iron ore.Under certain circum- Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-• Trade readjustment allowances under the
ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-stances, you can treat amounts you receive Trade Act of 1974.
ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute arefrom the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-taxable only if the amounts you receive are morements from the sale of a capital asset, rather
aster Relief and Emergency Assistancethan your total payments into the fund. Reportthan as royalty income. For information about
Act. the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
see Publication 544. Payments by a union.Benefits paid to you asGovernmental program. If you contribute
an unemployed member of a union from regularSale of property interest.If you sell yourto a governmental unemployment compensa-
union dues are included in your income on Formcomplete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,tion program and your contributions are not de-
1040, line 21. However, if the unemploymentthe amount you receive is considered paymentductible, amounts you receive under the
benefits are paid from a special fund to whichfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyprogram are not included as unemployment
you contributed, your payments to the fund areincome. Under certain circumstances, the salecompensation until you recover your contribu-
not deductible, and the benefit payments areis subject to capital gain or loss treatment ontions.
includible in your income only to the extent theySchedule D (Form 1040). For more information
Repayment of unemployment are more than your contributions.on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3
compensation. If you repaid in 2005 unem-of Publication 544. Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-ployment compensation you received in 2005,If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, ceive from your employer during periods of un-subtract the amount you repaid from the totalor a net profit interest in a mineral property for employment, under a union agreement thatamount you received and enter the difference onthe life of the property, you have made a lease or guarantees you full pay during the year, areline 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, ora sublease, and any cash you receive for the taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofline 3 of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next toassignment of other interests in the property is Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formyour entry enter “Repaid” and the amount youordinary income subject to a depletion allow- 1040EZ.repaid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-ance. tion in 2005 that you included in income in anState employees. Payments similar to aPart of future production sold.If you own earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaidstate’s unemployment compensation may be
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, if you item-made by the state to its employees who are not
duction, you generally treat the money you re-ize deductions. If the amount is more thancovered by the state’s unemployment compen-
ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a$3,000, see Repayments, earlier. sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your able, do not report them as unemploymentTax withholding.You can choose to haveincome or take depletion based on it. compensation. Report these payments on Formfederal income tax withheld from your unem-When production begins, you include all the 1040, line 21.ployment compensation. To make this choice,proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholdingtion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax willamount to arrive at your taxable income from thebe withheld at 10% of your payment.property. Welfare and OtherIf you do not choose to have tax with-
held from your unemployment com- Public Assistancepensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
estimated tax. For more information on esti-Unemployment Benefitsmated tax, see chapter 4.
Benefits Supplemental unemployment benefits. Do not include in your income governmental
Benefits received from an employer-financedbenefit payments from a public welfare fund
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youfund (to which the employees did not contribute)based upon need, such as payments due to
receive depends on the type of program paying are not unemployment compensation. They areblindness. Payments from a state fund for the
taxable as wages and are subject to withholdingthe benefits. victims of crime should not be included in the
Page 84 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 87 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
victims’ incomes if they are in the nature of Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.• A disaster which results from a terrorist orwelfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- Payments made by a state to qualified people tomilitary action,penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You reduce their cost of winter energy use are not
• A Presidentially declared disaster, ormust include in your income any welfare pay- taxable.
ments that are compensation for services or that• A disaster which results from an accidentare obtained fraudulently. involving a common carrier, or from any
other event, which is determined to be cat-Alternative trade adjustment assistance
Other Incomeastrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive
or his or her delegate.from a state agency under the Demonstration
The following brief discussions are arranged inProject for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster istance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-
cussed in greater detail in another publicationqualified if it is determined by an applicablecluded in your income. The state must send you
include a reference to that publication.federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount you
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-should include in income. The amount should be Activity not for profit.You must include onment, agency, or instrumentality.reported on Form 1040, line 21. your return income from an activity from which
you do not expect to make a profit. An exampleDisaster mitigation payments.You can alsoPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa- of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youexclude from income any amount you receivebility, you must include in income compensation operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.that is a qualified disaster mitigation payment.you receive for services you perform unless the Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-Like qualified disaster relief payments, qualifiedcompensation is otherwise excluded. However, tions for expenses related to the activity aredisaster mitigation payments are also most com-you do not include in income the value of goods, limited. They cannot total more than the incomemonly paid to you in the period immediatelyservices, and cash that you receive, not in return you report and can be taken only if you itemizefollowing damage to property as a result of afor your services, but for your training and reha- deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Seenatural disaster. However, disaster mitigationbilitation because you have a disability. Excluda- Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduceble amounts include payments for transportation tion 535 for information on whether an activity isthe severity of) potential damage from futureand attendant care, such as interpreter services considered carried on for a profit.natural disasters. They are paid to you throughfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, and
state and local governments based on the provi-services to help mentally retarded persons do Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.If you re-
sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relieftheir work. ceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral income
and Emergency Assistance Act or the Nationalfund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report
Disaster relief grants. Do not include Flood Insurance Act. it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of
post-disaster grants received under the DisasterYou cannot increase the basis or adjustedForm 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in yourbasis of your property for improvements madestate of Alaska sends each recipient a document
income if the grant payments are made to helpwith nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.that shows the amount of the payment with the
you meet necessary expenses or serious needsIf in a previous year you filed a tax returncheck. The amount is also reported to IRS.
for medical, dental, housing, personal property,reporting disaster mitigation payments as tax-Alimony. Include in your income on Formtransportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-able income, you should file Form 1040X to1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-duct casualty losses or medical expenses thatclaim a refund. You must file an amended returnceive. Amounts you receive for child support areare specifically reimbursed by these disasterfor tax years that are not closed by the statute ofnot income to you. Alimony and child supportrelief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-limitations. The statute of limitations generallypayments are discussed in chapter 18.ments under the Act are taxable unemploymentdoes not end until 3 years after the due date of
compensation. See Unemployment compensa- your original return. Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your
tion under Unemployment Benefits, earlier. income.
Mortgage assistance payments. Payments
Campaign contributions. These contribu-Disaster relief payments.You can exclude made under section 235 of the National Housing
tions are not income to a candidate unless theyfrom income any amount you receive that is aAct for mortgage assistance are not included in
are diverted to his or her personal use. To bequalified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the
exempt from tax, the contributions must beaster relief payment is an amount paid to you: homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundgram cannot be deducted.
for use in future campaigns. However, interest1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
earned on bank deposits, dividends received onessary personal, family, living, or funeralMedicare. Medicare benefits received under
contributed securities, and net gains realized onexpenses that result from a qualified disas-title XVIII of the Social Security Act are not
sales of contributed securities are taxable andter, includible in the gross income of the individuals
must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In-for whom they are paid. This includes basic (part2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))essary expenses incurred for the repair or tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to anand supplementary (part B (Supplementaryrehabilitation of your home or repair or re- office account must be included in theMedical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).placement of its contents to the extent it is officeholder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, indue to a qualified disaster, the year transferred.Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orbenefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromsale of transportation as a common carriersection 202 of title II of the Social Security Acta dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isbecause of the death or personal physicalare not includible in the gross income of thenot income, but you must reduce your basis byinjuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedindividuals for whom they are paid. This appliesthe amount of the rebate.disaster, or to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,4. By a federal, state, or local government, or Example. You buy a new car for $9,000widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, asagency, or instrumentality in connection cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thewell as the lump-sum death payment.with a qualified disaster in order to pro- manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.
mote the general welfare. Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basisNutrition Program for the Elderly.Food on which you figure gain or loss if you sell theYou can only exclude this amount to the extentbenefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-car, and depreciation if you use it for business.any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applypare and serve free meals for the program,Casualty insurance and other
if you were a participant or conspirator in ainclude in your income as wages the cash payreimbursements. You generally should not
terrorist action or his or her representative.you receive, even if you are also eligible for food report these reimbursements on your return, un-
A qualified disaster is: benefits. less you are figuring gain or loss from the casu-
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 85

Page 88 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
alty or theft. See Publication 547, Casualties, illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over
Disasters, and Thefts, for more information. Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred
received during the year that is more than the property to the trust.) This rule applies if theChild support payments.You should not re-amount of the premiums you paid during the property (or income from the property) put intoport these payments on your return. See Publi-year. the trust will or may revert (be returned) to thecation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, grantor or the grantor’s spouse.for more information. Employment agency fees. If you get a job Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the
through an employment agency, and the fee isgrantor has a reversionary interest valued (atCourt awards and damages. To determine ifpaid by your employer, the fee is not includible inthe date of transfer) at more than 5% of thesettlement amounts you receive by compromiseyour income if you are not liable for it. However,value of the transferred property.or judgment must be included in your income,if you pay it and your employer reimburses youyou must consider the item that the settlementfor it, it is includible in your income. Expenses paid by another.If your personalreplaces. Include the following as ordinary in- expenses are paid for by another person, suchcome. Energy conservation subsidies. You can as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-you depending upon your relationship with that1. Interest on any award. vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-person and the nature of the payment. But if the2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profitsties for the purchase or installation of an energypayment makes up for a loss caused by thatin most cases. conservation measure for a dwelling unit.person, and only restores you to the position you
were in before the loss, the payment is not3. Punitive damages. It does not matter ifEnergy conservation measure. This in-
includible in your income.they relate to a physical injury or physicalcludes installations or modifications that are pri-
sickness. marily designed to reduce consumption of Fees for services.Include all fees for yourelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man-4. Amounts received in settlement of pension services in your income. Examples of these feesagement of energy demand.rights (if you did not contribute to the plan). are amounts you receive for services you per-
Dwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-form as:5. Damages for: ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-• A corporate director,lar property. If a building or structure containsa. Patent or copyright infringement,
both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must• An executor, administrator, or personalb. Breach of contract, or be properly allocated. representative of an estate,
c. Interference with business operations. • A notary public, orEstate and trust income.    An estate or trust,
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal• An election precinct official.6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estatetress received to satisfy a claim under Titleor trust, you may be taxed on your share of itsNonemployee compensation. If you areVII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. income distributed or required to be distributednot an employee and the fees for your services7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-to you. However, there is never a double tax.from the same payer total $600 or more for thegent fees) where the underlying recoveryEstates and trusts file their returns on Formyear, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. Youis included in gross income. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andmay need to report your fees as self-employ-
Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedment income. See Self-Employed Persons, inDo not include in your income compensatoryto you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041). chapter 1, for a discussion of when you aredamages for personal physical injury or physical
considered self-employed.sickness (whether received in a lump sum orCurrent income required to be distributed.
installments). If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustCorporate director. Corporate director
that must distribute all of its current income, youfees are self-employment income. Report theseEmotional distress.Emotional distress it-must report your share of the distributable netpayments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZself is not a physical injury or physical sickness,income, whether or not you actually received it.(Form 1040).but damages you receive for emotional distress
due to a physical injury or sickness are treatedCurrent income not required to be distrib-Personal representatives. All personalas received for the physical injury or sickness.uted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate orrepresentatives must include in their gross in-Do not include them in your income. trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whethercome fees paid to them from an estate. If youIf the emotional distress is due to a personalto distribute all or part of the current income, youare not in the trade or business of being aninjury that is not due to a physical injury ormust report: executor (for instance, you are the executor of asickness (for example, employment discrimina- friend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on• All income that is required to be distributedtion or injury to reputation), you must include the Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade orto you, whether or not it is actually distrib-damages in your income, except for any dam- business of being an executor, report these feesuted, plusages you receive for medical care due to that as self-employment income on Schedule C oremotional distress. Emotional distress includes• All other amounts actually paid or creditedSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is notphysical symptoms that result from emotionalto you, includible in income if it is waived.distress, such as headaches, insomnia, andup to the amount of your share of distributableNotary public. Report payments for thesestomach disorders. net income. services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZDeduction for costs involved in unlawful (Form 1040). These payments are not subject toHow to report. Treat each item of incomediscrimination suits.You may be able to de- self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-the same way that the estate or trust would treatduct attorney fees and court costs paid to re- tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income iscover a judgement or settlement for a claim ofdistributed to you, you report the distribution asElection precinct official.You should re-unlawful discrimination under various provisionsdividend income on your return. The same ruleceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-of federal, state, and local law listed in Internalapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interestices performed as an election official or electionRevenue Code section 62(e), a claim againstand capital gains. worker. Report these payments on line 7 ofthe United States government, or a claim underThe fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formsection 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.you the type of items making up your share of1040EZ.For more information, see Publication 525.the estate or trust income and any credits you
Credit card insurance.Generally, if you re- Foster-care providers.Payments you re-are allowed on your individual income tax return.
ceive benefits under a credit card disability or ceive from a state, political subdivision, or aLosses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are qualified foster care placement agency for pro-ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.taxable to you. These plans make the minimum viding care to qualified foster individuals in your
monthly payment on your credit card account ifGrantor trust.Income earned by a grantor home generally are not included in your income.
you cannot make the payment due to injury, trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi- However, you must include in your income pay-
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 89 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ments received for the care of more than 5 income the fair market value of bonds, cars, Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) if
individuals age 19 or older and certain houses, and other noncash prizes. from your self-employment activity.
difficulty-of-care payments. If you win a state lottery prize payableIndian fishing rights.If you are a member ofA qualified foster individual is a person who:in installments, see Publication 525a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights
for more information. secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of
TIP
1. Is living in a foster family home, and
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeForm W-2G. You may have received a2. Was placed there by: in your income amounts you receive from activi-Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-ties related to those fishing rights. The income isa. An agency of a state or one of its politi-ing the amount of your gambling winnings andnot subject to income tax, self-employment tax,cal subdivisions, or any tax taken out of them. Include the amountor employment taxes.from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include theb. A qualified foster care placement amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64,Interest on frozen deposits.In general, youagency. as federal income tax withheld. exclude from your income the amount of interest
earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest incomeGifts and inheritances.Generally, propertyDifficulty-of-care payments.These are on frozen deposits in chapter 7.you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance isadditional payments that are designated by the
not included in your income. However, if prop-Interest on qualified savings bonds.Youpayer as compensation for providing the addi-
erty you receive this way later produces income may be able to exclude from income the interesttional care that is required for physically, men-
such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem iftally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
is taxable to you. If property is given to a trust you pay qualified higher educational expensesindividuals. A state must determine that the ad-
and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis- in the same year. For more information on thisditional compensation is needed, and the care
tributed to you, that income is also taxable to exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-for which the payments are made must be pro-
you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is thegram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.vided in your home.
income from the property, that income is taxableYou must include in your income Job interview expenses.If a prospective em-to you.difficulty-of-care payments received for more ployer asks you to appear for an interview and
than: Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited aeither pays you an allowance or reimburses you
pension or an individual retirement arrangementfor your transportation and other travel ex-• 10 qualified foster individuals under age(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-penses, the amount you receive is generally not19, or ited amount in your income. See chapter 10 iftaxable. You include in income only the amount
• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 oryou inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if youyou receive that is more than your actual ex-
older. inherited an IRA. penses.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notJury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must beMaintaining space in home.If you are paid
deductible from other income. A hobby is anincluded in your income on Form 1040, line 21. Ifto maintain space in your home for emergency
activity from which you do not expect to make ayou must give the pay to your employer becausefoster care, you must include the payment in
profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier. your employer continues to pay your salaryyour income.
while you serve on the jury, you can deduct theIf you collect stamps, coins, or otherReporting taxable payments. If you re- amount turned over to your employer as anitems as a hobby for recreation andceive payments that you must include in your adjustment to your income. Include the amountpleasure, and you sell any of theincome, you are in business as a foster-careCAUTION
!
you repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36.items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.provider and you are self-employed. Report the Enter “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotted(See chapter 16.) However, if you sell items frompayments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ line next to line 36.your collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business
loss.Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare Kickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, side
Providers), to help you determine the amount commissions, push money, or similar paymentsHolocaust victims restitution.Restitutionyou can deduct for the use of your home. you receive in your income on Form 1040, linepayments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formthe heir of a Holocaust victim) and interestFound property. If you find and keep property 1040), if from your self-employment activity.earned on the payments, including interestthat does not belong to you that has been lost orearned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to you Example. You sell cars and help arrangecounts or funds, are not taxable. You also do notat its fair market value in the first year it is your car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payinclude them in any computations in which youundisputed possession. back part of their commissions to you for refer-would ordinarily add excludable income to yourring customers to them. You must include theadjusted gross income, such as the computationFree tour. If you received a free tour from a kickbacks in your income.to determine the taxable part of social securitytravel agency for organizing a group of tourists,
benefits. If the payments are made in property,Medical savings accounts (MSAs). Youyou must include its value in your income. Re-
your basis in the property is its fair market valuegenerally do not include in income amounts youport the fair market value of the tour on Form
when you receive it. withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or
Excludable restitution payments are pay-Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay forbusiness of organizing tours. You cannot deduct
ments or distributions made by any country orqualified medical expenses. Generally, qualifiedyour expenses in serving as the voluntary leader
any other entity because of persecution of anmedical expenses are those you can deduct onof the group at the group’s request. If you organ-
individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalSchedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions.ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’s
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by NaziFor more information about qualified medicalvalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
Germany, any other Axis regime, or any otherexpenses, see chapter 21. For more information1040).
Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whetherabout Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage
the payments are made under a law or as aMSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac-Gambling winnings. You must include your
result of a legal action. They include compensa-counts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, line
tion or reparation for property losses resulting21. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in afrom Nazi persecution, including proceedsA (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling losses lucky number drawing, television or radio quizunder insurance policies issued before and dur-you had during the year, but only up to the program, beauty contest, or other event, youing World War II by European insurance compa-amount of your winnings. See chapter 28 for must include it in your income. For example, ifnies.information on recordkeeping. you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,
Lotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-Illegal income.Illegal income, such as money you must report this income on Form 1040, line
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi- from dealing illegal drugs, must be included in 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not include
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on its value in your income.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

Page 90 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prizes and awards in goods or services must employees and their families by an educational• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that arebe included in your income at their fair market institution, see Publication 970.more than the social security equivalentvalue. benefit. VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
Employee awards or bonuses. Cash partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in• Tier 2 benefits.awards or bonuses given to you by your em- your income. These allowances are not consid-
• Vested dual benefits.ployer for good work or suggestions generally ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
must be included in your income as wages. Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestHowever, certain noncash employee achieve-Rewards. If you receive a reward for providingare not scholarships or fellowships if you do notment awards can be excluded from income. Seeinformation, include it in your income. have to use the prizes for educational purposes.Bonuses and awards in chapter 5. You must include these amounts in your incomeSale of home. You may be able to excludePulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If you on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you usefrom income all or part of any gain from the salewere awarded a prize in recognition of accom- the amounts for educational purposes.or exchange of a personal residence. See chap-plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-ter 15. Stolen property.If you steal property, youtistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you must report its fair market value in your incomeSale of personal items.If you sold an itemgenerally must include the value of the prize in in the year you steal it unless in the same year,you owned for personal use, such as a car,your income. However, you do not include this you return it to its rightful owner.refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orprize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.Transporting school children.Do not in-ing requirements.
Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-clude in your income a school board mileage• You were selected without any action onnot deduct a loss. allowance for taking children to and from schoolyour part to enter the contest or proceed-However, if you sold an item you held forif you are not in the business of taking children toing. investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain• You are not required to perform substan- ing this transportation.
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.tial future services as a condition to receiv- Union benefits and dues.Amounts deducteding the prize or award. from your pay for union dues, assessments,Example. You sold a painting on an online• The prize or award is transferred by the contributions, or other payments to a union can-auction website for $100. You bought the paint-payer directly to a governmental unit or not be excluded from your income.ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reporttax-exempt charitable organization as des- You may be able to deduct some of theseyour gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (Formignated by you. payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject1040). to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to yourSee Publication 525 for more information aboutScholarships and fellowships.A candidate job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule Athe conditions that apply to the transfer.for a degree can exclude amounts received as a(Form 1040). For more information, see  Union
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedDues and Expenses in chapter 28.Qualified tuition programs (QTPs).A quali- scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro- Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paidceive that is for:gram) is a program set up to allow you to either to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,
• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anprepay, or contribute to an account established including both cash and the fair market value of
educational institution, orfor paying, a student’s qualified higher education other property, are usually included in your in-
expenses at an eligible educational institution. A come as compensation. You can exclude these• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-program can be established and maintained by benefits from your income only when the factsquired for courses at the educational insti-a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, clearly show that the union intended them astution.or an eligible educational institution. gifts to you.
Amounts used for room and board do not qualifyThe part of a distribution representing the Utility rebates.If you are a customer of anfor the exclusion. See Publication 970 for moreamount paid or contributed to a QTP is not electric utility company and you participate in theinformation on qualified scholarships and fellow-included in income. This is a return of the invest- utility’s energy conservation program, you mayship grants.ment in the program. receive on your monthly electric bill either:The beneficiary generally does not include inPayment for services.Generally, you must • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-income any earnings distributed from a QTP ifinclude in income the part of any scholarship ortricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orthe total distribution is less than or equal tofellowship that represents payment for past,adjusted qualified higher education expenses.present, or future teaching, research, or other• A nonrefundable credit against theSee Publication 970 for more information.services. This applies even if all candidates for apurchase price of the electricity.
degree must perform the services to receive theRailroad retirement annuities.The following The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-degree.types of payments are treated as pension or able credit is not included in your income.For information about the rules that apply toannuity income and are taxable under the rules
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided toexplained in chapter 11.
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 91 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks, bonds,
or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, at least in part. ALosses loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also discuss gains from
selling property you personally use — including the special rules for selling your
home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are discussed in chapter 25 in
Part Five.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of sum, allocate the cost basis among the land and
Assets the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according
to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses13. the land and buildings at the time of purchase.
❏ 551 Basis of Assets Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions FMV of that asset and the denominator is the
Basis of ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property FMV of the whole property at the time of
purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs ofProperty
the land and buildings, you can allo-
cate the basis according to their as-
TIP
Cost Basis sessed values for real estate tax purposes.
Introduction The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Fair market value (FMV).FMV is the price
This chapter discusses how to figure your basisThe cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtat which the property would change hands be-
in property. It is divided into the following sec-obligations, other property, or services. Yourtween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither
cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-tions. having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-
lowing items: ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales• Cost basis. of similar property on or about the same date• Sales tax (less any applicable sales taxmay be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-• Adjusted basis. claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040)), erty.• Basis other than cost. • Freight,
Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-
• Installation and testing,Your basis is the amount of your investment in erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)
property for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure an existing mortgage on the property, your basis• Excise taxes,
gain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theydisposition of property. Also use it to figure de- plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),ductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- Settlement costs. Your basis includes thetion, and casualty losses. • Revenue stamps, settlement fees and closing costs you paid forIf you use property for both business or in- buying the property. (A fee for buying property is• Recording fees, andvestment purposes and for personal purposes, a cost that must be paid even if you buy the• Real estate taxes (if you assume liabilityyou must allocate the basis based on the use. property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsfor the seller).Only the basis allocated to the business or in- for getting a loan on the property in your basis.vestment use of the property can be depreci- The following are some of the settlementIn addition, the basis of real estate and businessated. fees or closing costs you can include in the basisassets may include other items.
Your original basis in property is adjusted of your property:
(increased or decreased) by certain events. ForLoans with low or no interest. If you buy • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees);example, if you make improvements to the prop-property on a time-payment plan that charges
erty, increase your basis. If you take deductions • Charges for installing utility services;little or no interest, the basis of your property is
for depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer-your stated purchase price minus any amount• Legal fees (including fees for the titletain credits, reduce your basis. considered to be unstated interest. You gener-search and preparation of the sales con-ally have unstated interest if your interest rate isKeep accurate records of all items tract and deed);less than the applicable federal rate.that affect the basis of your property. • Recording fees;For more information, see Unstated InterestFor more information on keeping rec-RECORDS
and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publicationords, see chapter 1. • Survey fees;537.
• Transfer taxes;
Useful Items • Owner’s title insurance; andReal PropertyYou may want to see:
• Any amounts the seller owes that youReal property, also called real estate, is land andPublication agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-generally anything built on, growing on, or at-est, recording or mortgage fees, chargestached to land.❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe for improvements or repairs, and salesIf you buy real property, certain fees andBenefits commissions.other expenses you pay are part of your cost❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income basis in the property. Settlement costs do not include amounts❏ 535 Business Expenses Lump sum purchase. If you buy buildings placed in escrow for the future payment of items
❏ 537 Installment Sales and the land on which they stand for a lump such as taxes and insurance.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 89

Page 92 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following are some of the settlementTable 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
basis of property: Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Casualty insurance premiums; • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
• Rent for occupancy of the property beforePutting an addition on your home subsidies for energy conservation
closing; Replacing an entire roof measures
Paving your driveway• Charges for utilities or other services re-
lated to occupancy of the property beforeInstalling central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductions
closing; Rewiring your home and insurance reimbursements
• Charges connected with getting a loan,
• Assessments for local improvements: • Credit for qualified electric vehiclessuch as points (discount points, loan origi-
Water connectionsnation fees), mortgage insurance premi-
Extending utility service lines to the• Postponed gain from the sale of a homeums, loan assumption fees, cost of a
propertycredit report, and fees for an appraisal re-
quired by a lender; and Sidewalks • Deduction for clean-fuel vehicles and
Roads clean-fuel vehicle refueling property• Fees for refinancing a mortgage.
• Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
Real estate taxes.If you pay real estate taxesRestoring damaged propertythe seller owed on real property you bought, and • Nontaxable corporate distributionsthe seller did not reimburse you, treat those• Legal fees:taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deductCost of defending and perfecting a title• Certain canceled debt excluded fromthem as an expense.
Fees for getting a reduction of an incomeIf you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller
assessmentpaid for you, you can usually deduct that amount
as an expense in the year of purchase. Do not
• Zoning costs • Easementsinclude that amount in the basis of your property.
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. •
 Adoption tax benefits
Points. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
ing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving yourDepreciation and section 179 deduction.
or a home equity loan), do not add the points todriveway. Decrease the basis of your qualifying business
the basis of the related property. Generally, you property by any section 179 deduction you takeAssessments for local improvements.deduct the points over the term of the loan. For and the depreciation you deducted, or couldAdd to the basis of property assessments formore information on how to deduct points, see have deducted (including any special deprecia-improvements such as streets and sidewalks ifchapter 23. tion allowance), on your tax returns under thethey increase the value of the property as-method of depreciation you selected.Points on home mortgage. Special rules sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However,
may apply to points you and the seller pay whenyou can deduct as taxes assessments for main-For more information about depreciation and
you get a mortgage to buy your main home. Iftenance or repairs, or for meeting interestthe section 179 deduction, see Publication 946.
certain requirements are met, you can deductcharges related to the improvements.
the points in full for the year in which they are Example. You owned a duplex used as
paid. Reduce the basis of your home by any Example. Your city changes the street inrental property that cost you $40,000, of which
seller-paid points. front of your store into an enclosed pedestrian$35,000 was allocated to the building and
mall and assesses you and other affected prop-$5,000 to the land. You added an improvement
erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Addto the duplex that cost $10,000. In February last
the assessment to your property’s basis. In thisyear, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to that
example, the assessment is a depreciable as-time, you had been allowed depreciation ofAdjusted Basis
set. $23,000. You sold some salvaged material for
$1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-Before figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange,
ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofor other disposition of property or figuring allow-Decreases to Basis $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.able depreciation, depletion, or amortization,
You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceedsyou must usually make certain adjustments (in-Decrease the basis of any property by all items
for restoration of the duplex, which was com-creases and decreases) to the cost of the prop-that represent a return of capital for the period
pleted this year. You must use the duplex’serty. The result is the adjusted basis. during which you held the property. Examples of
adjusted basis after the restoration to determineitems that decrease basis are shown in Table
depreciation for the rest of the property’s recov-13-1. These include the items discussed below.Increases to Basis ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
plex as follows:Increase the basis of any property by all itemsCasualty and theft losses.If you have a cas-properly added to a capital account. Examplesualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in yourOriginal cost of duplex......... $35,000of items that increase basis are shown in Tableproperty by any insurance proceeds or otherAddition to duplex............ 10,00013-1. The following discussions provide infor- Total cost of duplex........... $45,000reimbursement and by any deductible loss notmation about many of these items. Minus: Depreciation.......... 23,000covered by insurance.
Adjusted basis before casualty.... $22,000You must increase your basis in the propertyImprovements. Add to your basis in property Minus: Insuranceby the amount you spend on repairs that sub-the cost of improvements having a useful life of proceeds ...... $19,700stantially prolong the life of the property, in-more than 1 year, that increase the value of the Deducted casualtycrease its value, or adapt it to a different use. Toproperty, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- loss.......... 1,000make this determination, compare the repairedent use. For example, improvements include Salvage proceeds  1,300  22,000property to the property before the casualty.putting a recreation room in your unfinished Adjusted basis after casualty..... $-0-
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- For more information on casualty and theftAdd: Cost of restoring duplex..... 19,000
Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000room, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb- losses, see chapter 25.
Page 90 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 93 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Note. Your basis in the land is its original However, this rule does not apply if you make anExample. The state condemned your prop-
cost of $5,000. erty. The adjusted basis of the property waselection to include in income the FMV of the
$26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it.property at the time it is transferred to you, lessEasements. The amount you receive for You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −any amount you paid for it. Property is substan-granting an easement is generally considered to $26,000). You bought replacement propertytially vested when it is transferable or when it isbe proceeds from the sale of an interest in real similar in use to the converted property fornot subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (youproperty. It reduces the basis of the affected part $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000do not have a good chance of losing it). Forof the property. If the amount received is more ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of themore information, see Restricted Property inthan the basis of the part of the property affected payment from the state. Your unrecognized gainPublication 525.by the easement, reduce your basis in that part is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000
to zero and treat the excess as a recognizedBargain purchases. A bargain purchase isrealized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.
gain. a purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asThe basis of the replacement property is figured
If the gain is on a capital asset, see chaptercompensation for services, you buy goods oras follows:
16 for information about how to report it. If theother property at less than FMV, include the
gain is on property used in a trade or business,difference between the purchase price and theCost of replacement property...... $29,000
see Publication 544 for information about how to Minus: Gain not recognized....... 3,000property’s FMV in your income. Your basis in the
report it. Basis of replacement property... $26,000property is its FMV (your purchase price plus the
amount you include in income).Credit for qualified electric vehicles.If you Allocating the basis.If you buy more than If the difference between your purchaseclaim the credit for a qualified electric vehicle, one piece of replacement property, allocate yourprice and the FMV is a qualified employee dis-you must reduce your basis in that vehicle by the basis among the properties based on their re-count, do not include the difference in income.maximum credit allowable even if the credit al- spective costs.However, your basis in the property is still itslowed is less than that maximum amount. For
FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publicationinformation on this credit, see chapter 12 in Basis for depreciation.Special rules apply in15-B.Publication 535. determining and depreciating the basis of
MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-Deduction for clean-fuel vehicle and refuel- version. For information, see What Is the BasisTaxable Exchangesing property. If you take the deduction for of Your Depreciable Property? in chapter 1 ofclean-fuel vehicles or clean-fuel vehicle refuel-A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isPublication 946.ing property placed in service in 2005, decreasetaxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gainthe basis of the property by the amount de-or deductible loss also is known as a recognizedducted. For more information about this deduc- Nontaxable Exchangesgain or loss. If you receive property in exchangetion, see chapter 12 in Publication 535. for other property in a taxable exchange, theA nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which
basis of the property you receive is usually itsExclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- you are not taxed on any gain and you cannot
FMV at the time of the exchange.tion measures. You can exclude from gross deduct any loss. If you receive property in a
income any subsidy you received from a public nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the
utility company for the purchase or installation of same as the basis of the property you trans-Involuntary Conversionsan energy conservation measure for a dwelling ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for whichIf you receive replacement property as a result
you received the subsidy by the excluded of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
amount. For more information about this sub- Like-Kind Exchangestheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of thesidy, see chapter 12. replacement property using the basis of the con-
The exchange of property for the same kind ofverted property.Postponed gain from sale of home.If you property is the most common type of nontaxablepostponed gain from the sale of your main home exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,Similar or related property.If you receiveunder rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you the property traded and the property receivedreplacement property similar or related in serv-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired must be both of the following.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-as a replacement by the amount of the post-
• Qualifying property.ment property’s basis is the same as theponed gain. For more information on the rules
converted property’s basis on the date of thefor the sale of a home, see chapter 15. • Like-kind property.conversion, with the following adjustments.
The basis of the property you receive is gener-1. Decrease the basis by the following. ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-
Basis Other Than Cost erty you gave up. If you trade property in aa. Any loss you recognize on the involun-
like-kind exchange and also pay money, thetary conversion.
There are many times when you cannot use cost basis of the property received is the adjusted
b. Any money you receive that you do notas basis. In these cases, the fair market value or basis of the property you gave up increased by
spend on similar property.the adjusted basis of the property can be used. the money you paid.
Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis Qualifying property.In a like-kind exchange,2. Increase the basis by the following.were discussed earlier. you must hold for investment or for productive
a. Any gain you recognize on the involun-use in your trade or business both the property
Property Received tary conversion. you give up and the property you receive.
for Services b. Any cost of acquiring the replacementLike-kind property.There must be an ex-
property. change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-If you receive property for your services, include ties are properties of the same nature orits FMV in income. The amount you include in character, even if they differ in grade or quality.income becomes your basis. If the servicesMoney or property not similar or related. If The exchange of real estate for real estate andwere performed for a price agreed on before-you receive money or property not similar orpersonal property for similar personal propertyhand, it will be accepted as the FMV of therelated in service or use to the converted prop-are exchanges of like-kind property.property if there is no evidence to the contrary.erty, and you buy replacement property similar
or related in service or use to the convertedRestricted property.If you receive prop- Example. You trade in an old truck used in
property, the basis of the replacement propertyerty for your services and the property is subject your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700
is its cost decreased by the gain not recognizedto certain restrictions, your basis in the property for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allows
on the conversion.is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 91

Page 94 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the income includible in the transferor’s income. For increase in value of the gift and the denominator
new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old more information on these bonds, see chapter 7. is the amount of the gift.
one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800). The net increase in value of the gift is theAt the time of the transfer, the transferor
If you sell your old truck to a third party for FMV of the gift minus the donor’s adjusted basis.must give you the records needed to determine
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a The amount of the gift is its value for gift taxthe adjusted basis and holding period of the
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-property as of the date of the transfer.
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price sion and marital or charitable deduction thatFor more information about the transfer ofminus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,property from a spouse, see chapter 14.the new truck is the price you pay the dealer. see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and
Gift Taxes.
Property ReceivedPartially nontaxable exchanges.A partially
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which Example. In 2005, you received a gift ofas a Giftyou receive unlike property or money in addition property from your mother that had an FMV of
to like-kind property. The basis of the property $50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. TheTo figure the basis of property you receive as a
you receive is the same as the adjusted basis of amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasgift, you must know its adjusted basis to the
the property you gave up, with the following $39,000 ($50,000 minus the $11,000 annualdonor just before it was given to you, its FMV at
adjustments. exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $9,000 on thethe time it was given to you, and any gift tax paid
property. Your basis is $26,930, figured as fol-on it.1. Decrease the basis by the following lows:amounts. FMV less than donor’s adjusted basis.If the
Fair market value.............. $50,000FMV of the property at the time of the gift is lessa. Any money you receive. Minus: Adjusted basis........... −20,000than the donor’s adjusted basis, your basis de-
Net increase in value........... $30,000b. Any loss you recognize on the ex- pends on whether you have a gain or a loss
change. when you dispose of the property. Your basis forGift tax paid................. $9,000figuring gain is the same as the donor’s adjustedMultiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $39,000) . . .× .772. Increase the basis by the following basis plus or minus any required adjustments toGift tax due to net increase in value $6,930amounts. basis while you held the property. Your basis forAdjusted basis of property to yourfiguring loss is its FMV when you received themother..................... +20,000a. Any additional costs you incur. gift plus or minus any required adjustments toYour basis in the property....... $26,930b. Any gain you recognize on the ex- basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
change. Basis, earlier.
Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,
your basis in the gift (the donor’s adjusted basis)If the other party to the exchange assumes Example. You received an acre of land as a
includes any gift tax paid on it. However, youryour liabilities, treat the debt assumption asgift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMV
basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at themoney you received in the exchange. of $8,000. The donor’s adjusted basis was
time it was given to you.$10,000. After you received the property, noAllocation of basis.If you receive like-kindevents occurred to increase or decrease yourand unlike properties in the exchange, allocatebasis. If you later sell the property for $12,000,Inherited Propertythe basis first to the unlike property, other thanyou will have a $2,000 gain because you mustmoney, up to its FMV on the date of the ex-use the donor’s adjusted basis at the time of theYour basis in property you inherit from a dece-change. The rest is the basis of the like-kindgift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If youdent is generally one of the following.property. sell the property for $7,000, you will have a
• The FMV of the property at the date of the$1,000 loss because you must use the FMV atMore information.See Like-Kind Exchanges decedent’s death.the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis toin chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa-
figure loss. • The FMV on the alternate valuation date iftion.
If the sales price is between $8,000 and the personal representative for the estate
Basis for depreciation.Special rules apply in$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss. elects to use alternate valuation.
determining and depreciating the basis of Business property. If you hold the gift as• The value under the special-use valuationMACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex-business property, your basis for figuring anymethod for real property used in farmingchange. For information, see What Is the Basisdepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-or a closely held business if elected forof Your Depreciable Property? in chapter 1 oftions is the same as the donor’s adjusted basisestate tax purposes.Publication 946. plus or minus any required adjustments to basis• The decedent’s adjusted basis in land towhile you hold the property. the extent of the value excluded from theProperty Transferred decedent’s taxable estate as a qualifiedFMV equal to or greater than donor’s ad-From a Spouse conservation easement.justed basis.If the FMV of the property is
equal to or greater than the donor’s adjustedThe basis of property transferred to you or trans- If a federal estate tax return does not have tobasis, your basis is the donor’s adjusted basis atferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is be filed, your basis in the inherited property is itsthe time you received the gift. Increase yourthe same as your spouse’s adjusted basis. The appraised value at the date of death for statebasis by all or part of any gift tax paid, dependingsame rule applies to a transfer by your former inheritance or transmission taxes.on the date of the gift, explained later.spouse that is incident to divorce. However, for For more information, see the instructions toAlso, for figuring gain or loss from a sale orproperty transferred in trust, adjust your basis Form 706, United States Estate (andother disposition or for figuring depreciation, de-for any gain recognized by your spouse or for- Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.pletion, or amortization deductions on businessmer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the
property, you must increase or decrease yourliabilities to which the property is subject, are Community property. In community property
basis (the donor’s adjusted basis) by any re-more than the adjusted basis of the property states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,
quired adjustments to basis while you held thetransferred. Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and
property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier. Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usually
If the property transferred to you is a series If you received a gift during the tax year, considered to own half the community property.
E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the increase your basis in the gift (the donor’s ad- When either spouse dies, the total value of the
transferor must include in income the interest justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it community property, even the part belonging to
accrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figure the surviving spouse, generally becomes the
bond immediately after the transfer is equal to the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by a basis of the entire property. For this rule to
the transferor’s basis increased by the interest fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the net apply, at least half the value of the community
Page 92 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 95 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property interest must be includible in thebasis you use will depend on whether you are or $16 a share. In 2005 XYZ declared a 2-for-1
decedent’s gross estate, whether or not the es- stock split. You now have 200 shares of stockfiguring gain or loss.
tate must file a return. with a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with aGain. The basis for figuring a gain is yourbasis of $8 a share.Example. You and your spouse owned adjusted basis in the property when you sell the
community property that had a basis of $80,000.property. Other basis. There are other ways to figureWhen your spouse died, half the FMV of the the basis of stocks or bonds depending on howcommunity interest was includible in your Example. Assume the same facts as in theyou acquired them. For detailed information, seespouse’s estate. The FMV of the communityprevious example except that you sell the prop-Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentinterest was $100,000. The basis of your half oferty at a gain after being allowed depreciationProperty in chapter 4 of Publication 550.the property after the death of your spouse isdeductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for
$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basisfiguring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000Identifying stocks or bonds sold.If you can
of the other half to your spouse’s heirs is also(land) − $37,500). adequately identify the shares of stock or the
$50,000. bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or otherLoss. Figure the basis for a loss startingFor more information about community prop- basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds.with the smaller of your adjusted basis or theerty, see Publication 555, Community Property. If you buy and sell securities at various times inFMV of the property at the time of the change tovarying quantities and you cannot adequatelybusiness or rental use. Then make adjustmentsidentify the shares you sell, the basis of theProperty Changed to (increases and decreases) for the period aftersecurities you sell is the basis of the securitiesthe change in the property’s use, as discussedBusiness or Rental Use you acquired first. For more information aboutearlier under Adjusted Basis. identifying securities you sell, see Stocks andIf you hold property for personal use and then Bonds under Basis of Investment Property inExample. Assume the same facts as in thechange it to business use or use it to produce chapter 4 of Publication 550.previous example, except that you sell the prop-rent, you can begin to depreciate the property at
erty at a loss after being allowed depreciationthe time of the change. To do so, you must figure Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual funddeductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldits basis for depreciation. An example of chang- shares you acquired at various times and pricesstart with the FMV on the date of the change toing property held for personal use to business or and left on deposit in an account kept by arental use ($180,000), because it is less than therental use would be renting out your former custodian or agent, you can elect to use anadjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 +personal residence. average basis. For more information, see Publi-$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce thatcation 564.Basis for depreciation.The basis for depre-amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc-ciation is the lesser of the following amounts.tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a
($180,000 − $37,500).• The FMV of the property on the date of the premium and elect to amortize the premium,
change. reduce the basis of the bond by the amortized
premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-Stocks and Bonds• Your adjusted basis on the date of the mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publicationchange. 550 for more information. Although you cannotThe basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally
deduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, youis the purchase price plus any costs of purchase,
Example. Several years ago, you paid must amortize the premium each year and re-such as commissions and recording or transfer
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedfees. If you get stocks or bonds other than by
cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent amount.purchase, your basis is usually determined byimprovements to the house and claimed a the FMV or the previous owner’s adjusted basis,$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to Original issue discount (OID) on debtas discussed earlier.the house before changing the property to rental instruments. You must increase your basis inYou must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-use last year. Because land is not depreciable, an OID debt instrument by the OID you includetain events that occur after purchase. For exam-you include only the cost of the house when in income for that instrument. See Original Issueple, if you receive additional stock fromfiguring the basis for depreciation. Discount (OID) in chapter 7 and Publicationnontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-Your adjusted basis in the house when you 1212, List of Original Issue Discount Instru-duce your basis for each share of stock by divid-changed its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + ments.ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by the$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, yournumber of shares of old and new stock. This ruleTax-exempt obligations.OID on tax-ex-property had an FMV of $180,000, of whichapplies only when the additional stock received empt obligations is generally not taxable. How-$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was foris identical to the stock held. Also reduce yourever, when you dispose of a tax-exemptthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation onbasis when you receive nontaxable distribu- obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andthe house is its FMV on the date of the changetions. They are a return of capital. acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrue($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted OID on the obligation to determine its adjustedbasis ($178,000). Example. In 2003 you bought 100 shares ofbasis. The accrued OID is added to the basis of
XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2004Sale of property.If you later sell or dispose of the obligation to determine your gain or loss.
you bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600property changed to business or rental use, the See chapter 4 of Publication 550.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 93

Page 96 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Useful Items
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirYou may want to see:
maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade.
14. Publication Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by a
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses dominant shareholder who retains control of the
corporation is treated as a contribution to capital❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale of Property from taxable income. The surrendering share-Form (and Instructions) holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains surrendered shares to the shares he or she
and Losses retains.Reminder
❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges Worthless securities.Stocks, stock rights,
and bonds (other than those held for sale by aForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen who
securities dealer) that became worthless duringsells property located outside the United States,
the tax year are treated as though they wereyou must report all gains and losses from the
sold on the last day of the tax year. This affectssale of that property on your tax return unless itSales and Trades whether your capital loss is long-term oris exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you
short-term. See Holding Period, later.reside inside or outside the United States andIf you sold property such as stocks, bonds, orIf you are a cash basis taxpayer and makewhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from thecertain commodities through a broker during thepayments on a negotiable promissory note thatpayer. year, you should receive, for each sale, a Formyou issued for stock that became worthless, you1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-can deduct these payments as losses in thechange Transactions, or an equivalent state-years you actually make the payments. Do notment from the broker. You should receive thededuct them in the year the stock became worth-statement by January 31 of the next year. It willless.Introduction show the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS
How to report loss.Report worthless se-will also get a copy of Form 1099-B from theThis chapter discusses the tax consequences of
curities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 orbroker.selling or trading investment property. It ex-
line 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d),Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state-plains:
enter “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your lossment received from your broker) to complete
in parentheses in column (f).• What a sale or trade is, Schedule D (Form 1040).
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not• Figuring gain or loss,
claim a loss for a worthless security on yourWhat Is a Sale or Trade?• Nontaxable trades, original return for the year it becomes worthless,
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to• Related party transactions,
also explains certain transactions and events the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amended• Capital gains or losses, that are treated as sales or trades. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend
your return for the year the security becameA sale is generally a transfer of property for• Capital assets and noncapital assets,
worthless. You must file it within 7 years from themoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise to• Holding period, and date your original return for that year had to bepay money.
filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,A trade is a transfer of property for other• Rollover of gain from publicly traded se-
whichever is later. For more information aboutproperty or services and may be taxed in thecurities.
filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claimssame way as a sale.
for Refund in chapter 1.Other property transactions.Certain trans-Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction
fers of property are not discussed here. They areis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyHow To Figurediscussed in other IRS publications. These in-for cash and immediately buy similar property to
clude: Gain or Lossreplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofInstallment sales, covered in Publication 537,under Nontaxable Trades, later.
property by comparing the amount you realizeInstallment Sales,
with the adjusted basis of the property.Redemption of stock.A redemption of stockTransfers of property at death, covered in Pub-is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to thelication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Admin- Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale orcapital gain or loss provisions unless the re-istrators, trade is more than the adjusted basis of thedemption is a dividend or other distribution onproperty you transfer, the difference is a gain.stock.Transactions involving business property, cov-
ered in Publication 544, Sales and Other Dis- Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youDividend versus sale or trade.Whether a
positions of Assets, transfer is more than the amount you realize, theredemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,
difference is a loss.or other distribution depends on the circum-Dispositions of an interest in a passive activity,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirectcovered in Publication 925, Passive Activity Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-ownership of stock will be considered. The re-and At-Risk Rules, and erty is your original cost or other original basisdemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: properly adjusted (increased or decreased) forSales of a main home, covered in chapter 15.
certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-1. The redemption is not essentially
tion about determining the adjusted basis ofequivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-
property.penses (Including Capital Gains and Losses),2. There is a substantially disproportionateprovides more detailed discussion about sales Amount realized. The amount you realizeredemption of stock,
and trades of investment property. Publication from a sale or trade of property is everything you3. There is a complete redemption of all the550 includes information about the rules cover- receive for the property. This includes thestock of the corporation owned by theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section money you receive plus the fair market value ofshareholder, or1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- any property or services you receive. If you
tures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis-4. The redemption is a distribution in partial received a note or other debt instrument for the
cusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. property, see How To Figure Gain or Loss in
Page 94 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 97 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
chapter 4 of Publication 550 to figure the amount erty may be property used for personal able trade even if you pay money in addition to
realized. the like property.purposes, such as your home or family
  If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourcar. Basis of property received.To figure the ba-property and the debt instrument does not pro-2. The property must not be held primarily forsis of the property received, see Nontaxablevide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedsale. The property you trade and the prop-Exchanges in chapter 13.interest that you must report as ordinary incomeerty you receive must not be property youwill reduce the amount realized from the sale. How to report.    You must report the trade ofsell to customers, such as merchandise.For more information, see Publication 537. like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-
3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onFair market value.Fair market value is the notes, choses in action, certificates of trustSchedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,price at which the property would change handsor beneficial interest, or other securities orSales of Business Property, whichever applies.between a buyer and a seller, neither being evidences of indebtedness or interest, in-For information on using Form 4797, seeforced to buy or sell and both having reasonablecluding partnership interests. However,chapter 4 of Publication 544.knowledge of all the relevant facts. you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-
Corporate stocks. The following trades ofrate stocks under a different rule, as dis-Example. You trade A Company stock with corporate stocks generally do not result in acussed later.an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company taxable gain or a deductible loss.
stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which4. There must be a trade of like property. The
Corporate reorganizations.In some in-is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000trade of real estate for real estate, or per-
stances, a company will give you common stock($10,000 − $7,000). sonal property for similar personal prop-
for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonerty, is a trade of like property. The tradeDebt paid off.A debt against the property, stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inof an apartment house for a store building,or against you, that is paid off as a part of the another corporation. If this is a result of aor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is atransaction, or that is assumed by the buyer, merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledtrade of like property. The trade of a piecemust be included in the amount realized. This is corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-of machinery for a store building is not atrue even if neither you nor the buyer is person- porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-trade of like property. Real property lo-ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.cated in the United States and real prop-trade property that is subject to a nonrecourseerty located outside the United States areStock for stock of the same corporation.loan, the amount you realize generally includesnot like property. Also, personal propertyYou can exchange common stock for commonthe full amount of the note assumed by the buyerused predominantly within the United stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in theeven if the amount of the note is more than theStates and personal property used same corporation without having a recognizedfair market value of the property. predominantly outside the United Statesgain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
are not like property. stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-Example. You sell stock that you had
holder and the corporation.pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.5. The property to be received must be identi-
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyerfied in writing within 45 days after the dateConvertible stocks and bonds.You gen-
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 inyou transfer the property given up in theerally will not have a recognized gain or loss if
cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000trade. you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock
+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 − into common stock of the same corporation ac-6. The property to be received must be re-$6,000). cording to a conversion privilege in the terms ofceived by the earlier of:
the bond or the preferred stock certificate.Payment of cash. If you trade property and
a. The 180th day after the date on whichcash for other property, the amount you realize Property for stock of a controlledyou transfer the property given up in theis the fair market value of the property you re- corporation. If you transfer property to a cor-trade, orceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- poration solely in exchange for stock in that
tracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basisb. The due date, including extensions, forcorporation, and immediately after the trade you
of the property you trade in from the amount youyour tax return for the year in which theare in control of the corporation, you ordinarily
realize. If the result is a positive number, it is atransfer of the property given up occurs.will not recognize a gain or loss. This rule ap-
gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a plies both to individuals and to groups who
loss. If you trade property with a related party in atransfer property to a corporation. It does not
like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.apply if the corporation is an investment com-No gain or loss.You may have to use a basisSee Related Party Transactions, later in thispany.for figuring gain that is different from the basischapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-used for figuring loss. In this case, you may havefor more information on exchanges of businessration, you or your group of transferors mustneither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than property and special rules for exchanges usingown, immediately after the exchange, at leastCost in chapter 13. qualified intermediaries or involving multiple80% of the total combined voting power of all
properties. classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%
Nontaxable Trades of the outstanding shares of each class of non-
Partly nontaxable exchange.If you receivevoting stock of the corporation.
This section discusses trades that generally domoney or unlike property in addition to like prop-If this provision applies to you, you must
not result in a taxable gain or deductible loss.erty, and the above six conditions are met, youattach to your return a complete statement of all
For more information on nontaxable trades, seehave a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed onfacts pertinent to the exchange.
chapter 1 of Publication 544. any gain you realize, but only up to the amountAdditional information.For more informa-of the money and the fair market value of thetion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable TradesLike-kind exchanges. If you trade businessunlike property you receive. You cannot deductin chapter 4 of Publication 550.or investment property for other business ora loss.
investment property of a like kind, you do not Insurance policies and annuities.You willLike property and unlike property trans-pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you not have a recognized gain or loss if the insuredferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be or annuitant is the same under both contractstion to the like property, you must recognize gainnontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the and you trade:or loss on the unlike property you give up. Thefollowing conditions. 
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-1. A life insurance contract for another life1. The property must be business or invest-justed basis of the unlike property and its fairinsurance contract or for an endowment orment property. You must hold both themarket value. annuity contract,property you trade and the property you
Like property and money transferred. Ifreceive for productive use in your trade or 2. An endowment contract for an annuity con-
conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax-business or for investment. Neither prop- tract or for another endowment contract
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 95

Page 98 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that provides for regular payments begin- chapter 3 of Publication 544 for more informa- 7. An executor and a beneficiary of an estate
ning at a date not later than the beginning tion. (except in the case of a sale or trade to
date under the old contract, or satisfy a pecuniary bequest).
Like-kind exchanges.Generally, if you trade3. An annuity contract for another annuity 8. Two corporations that are members of thebusiness or investment property for other busi-contract. same controlled group. (Under certain con-ness or investment property of a like kind, noditions, however, these losses are not dis-gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex-You also may not have to recognize gain or allowed but must be deferred.)changes earlier under Nontaxable Trades.loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuity
contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-This rule also applies to trades of property9. Two partnerships if the same persons own,
nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51. between related parties, defined next under directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the
Exchanges of contracts not included in thisLosses on sales or trades of property. However, capital interests or the profit interests in
list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-if either you or the related party disposes of theboth partnerships.
ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-like property within 2 years after the trade, you
tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.both must report any gain or loss not recognizedMultiple property sales or trades.If you
on the original trade on your return filed for thesell or trade to a related party a number of blocksDemutualization of life insurance year in which the later disposition occurs.of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youcompanies. If you received stock in exchange
must figure the gain or loss separately for eachfor your equity interest as a policyholder or anLosses on sales or trades of property.You block of stock or piece of property. The gain onannuitant, you generally will not have a recog-cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofeach item may be taxable. However, you cannotnized gain or loss. See Demutualization of Lifeproperty, other than a distribution in completededuct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotInsurance Companies in Publication 550. liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction isreduce gains from the sales of any of thesedirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-U.S. Treasury notes or bonds.You can trade items by losses on the sales of any of the othering related parties. certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for items.
other issues designated by the Secretary of the1. Members of your family. This includes onlyIndirect transactions.You cannot deductTreasury, with no gain or loss recognized on theyour brothers and sisters, half-brothersyour loss on the sale of stock through yourtrade. and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-party buys the same stock you had owned. This
Transfers Between scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).does not apply to a trade between related par-
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-Spouses 2. A partnership in which you directly or indi-dental and is not prearranged.rectly own more than 50% of the capital
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on ainterest or the profits interest. Constructive ownership of stock.In de-transfer of property from an individual to (or in termining whether a person directly or indirectly3. A corporation in which you directly or indi-trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of thea divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition tion, the following rules apply.outstanding stock. (See Constructive own-rule does not apply in the following situations.
ership of stock, later.) Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by• The recipient spouse or former spouse is or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4. A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-a nonresident alien. is considered owned proportionately by or for itsganization that is directly or indirectly con-
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.• Property is transferred in trust. Gain musttrolled, in any manner or by any method,
be recognized to the extent the amount ofby you or by a member of your family, Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownthe liabilities assumed by the trust, pluswhether or not this control is legally en-the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orany liabilities on the property, exceed theforceable. for his or her family. Family includes only broth-adjusted basis of the property. ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of
For other situations, see Publication 550. spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.property is not deductible if the transaction is
directly or indirectly between the following re-Any transfer of property to a spouse or former Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by
lated parties.spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is
treated by the recipient as a gift and is not considered to own the stock that is directly or1. A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient’s indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.and beneficiary, of any trust.basis in the property will be the same as the Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stockadjusted basis of the giver immediately before2. Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 isthe transfer. This carryover basis rule appliesfiduciary and beneficiary of two differenttreated as actually owned by that person. Butwhether the adjusted basis of the transferredtrusts, if the same person is the grantor ofstock constructively owned by an individualproperty is less than, equal to, or greater thanboth trusts. under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned byeither its fair market value at the time of transfer3. A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichthat individual for again applying either rule 2 oror any consideration paid by the recipient. Thismore than 50% in value of the outstandingrule 3 to make another person the constructiverule applies for purposes of determining loss asstock is directly or indirectly owned by orowner of the stock.well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transferfor the trust, or by or for the grantor of thein trust increases the basis. trust. Property received from a related party.IfA transfer of property is incident to a divorce
you sell or trade at a gain property that youif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date4. A corporation and a partnership if the
acquired from a related party, you recognize theon which the marriage ends, or if the transfer issame persons own more than 50% in
gain only to the extent it is more than the lossrelated to the ending of the marriage. value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
previously disallowed to the related party. Thisporation and more than 50% of the capital
rule applies only if you are the original transfereeinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-Related Party Transactions and you acquired the property by purchase ornership.
exchange. This rule does not apply if the relatedSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-5. Two S corporations if the same personsparty’s loss was disallowed because of the washerty between related parties. own more than 50% in value of the out-sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publication
standing stock of each corporation. 550 under Wash sales.Gain on sale or trade of depreciable
If you sell or trade at a loss property that youproperty. Your gain from the sale or trade of 6. Two corporations, one of which is an S
acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-property to a related party may be ordinary in- corporation, if the same persons own more
nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedcome, rather than capital gain, if the property than 50% in value of the outstanding stock
party.can be depreciated by the party receiving it. See of each corporation.
Page 96 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 99 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for• Gold, silver, or any other metal. Personal use property.Property held for per-
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell capital asset, and you must report a gain from its
cept the following noncapital assets. the same stock to an unrelated party for sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot
$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- deduct a loss from selling personal use property.
1. Property held mainly for sale to customersable gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus the
or property that will physically become a$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.
part of the merchandise that is for sale toDiscounted Debt Instruments
customers. Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-2. Depreciable property used in your trade oror retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentnized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusbusiness, even if fully depreciated. originally issued at a discount or bought at a$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that was
3. Real property used in your trade or busi-discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-not allowed to your brother.
ness. plained in the following discussions.
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticShort-term government obligations.Treat
composition, a letter or memorandum, orgains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-
similar property: ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-Capital Gains
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratablea. Created by your personal efforts, share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentand Losses
applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityb. Prepared or produced for you (in the
This section discusses the tax treatment of date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-
gains and losses from different types of invest- Acquisition discount is the stated redemptionlar property), or
ment transactions.    price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-tion.ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisCharacter of gain or loss.You need to clas- However, do not treat these gains as incomeof the person who created the propertysify your gains and losses as either ordinary or to the extent you previously included the dis-or for whom it was prepared or pro-capital gains or losses. You then need to classify count in income. See Discount on Short-Termduced.your capital gains and losses as either short Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
term or long term. If you have long-term gains5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired inShort-term nongovernment obligations.and losses, you must identify your 28% rate the ordinary course of a trade or businessTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,for services rendered or from the sale ofgations as ordinary income up to your ratableyou must also identify any unrecaptured sectionproperty described in (1). share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-1250 gain. ment applies to obligations that have a fixedThe correct classification and identification6. U.S. Government publications that you re-maturity date of not more than 1 year from thehelps you figure the limit on capital losses andceived from the government for free or fordate of issue.the correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi-less than the normal sales price, or thatHowever, to the extent you previously in-tal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16.you acquired under circumstances entitlingcluded the discount in income, you do not haveyou to the basis of someone who receivedto include it in income again. See Discount onthe publications for free or for less than theCapital or Ordinary Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-normal sales price. tion 550.Gain or Loss 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-Tax-exempt state and local governmentstruments held by commodities derivativesIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss bonds. If these bonds were originally issueddealers.from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade ofaction is clearly identified as a hedgingpart of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figurea capital asset (defined next) results in a capitaltransaction before the close of the day onyour gain or loss on the sale or trade of thesegain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital assetwhich it was acquired, originated, or en-bonds, reduce the amount realized by your partgenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-tered into. of the OID.pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on If the bonds were issued after September 3,9. Supplies of a type you regularly use ora sale or trade of property used in a trade or 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-consume in the ordinary course of yourbusiness may be treated as either capital or crease the adjusted basis by your part of thetrade or business.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationsome situations, part of your gain or loss may be on the basis of these bonds, see Discounteda capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi- Debt Instruments in chapter 4 of Publicationnary gain or loss. Investment Property 550.
Any gain from market discount is usually
Investment property is a capital asset. Any gaintaxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-Capital Assets and or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capitalempt bonds. If you bought the bonds before MayNoncapital Assets gain or loss. 1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capital
gain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,For the most part, everything you own and useGold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. 1993, the gain is ordinary income.for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentThese are capital assets except when they areYou figure the market discount by sub-is a capital asset. Some examples are: held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss youtracting the price you paid for the bond from thehave from their sale or trade generally is a capi-sum of the original issue price of the bond and• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-tal gain or loss. the amount of accumulated OID from the date ofcount,
issue that represented interest to any earlierStocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of these• A house owned and used by you and your holders. For more information, see Market Dis-(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-family, count Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.ital assets except when held for sale by a securi-A loss on the sale or other disposition of a• Household furnishings, ties dealer. However, if you own small businesstax-exempt state or local government bond isstock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-• A car used for pleasure or commuting, deductible as a capital loss.ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-• Coin or stamp collections, vestment Company Stock  in chapter 4 of Redeemed before maturity. If a state or
• Gems and jewelry, and Publication 550. local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notdiscount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru-Losses on Small Business
taxable to you. ments in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Investment Company Stock
If a state or local bond issued after June 8,Retirement of debt instrument. Any See Losses on Small Business Investment1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofamount that you receive on the retirement of aCompany Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.the OID that is earned while you hold the bond isdebt instrument is treated in the same way as ifnot taxable to you. However, you must report theyou had sold or traded that instrument.unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. Holding Period
Notes of individuals.If you hold an obligationExample. On July 1, 1994, the date of is- If you sold or traded investment property, youof an individual that was issued with OID aftersue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond must determine your holding period for the prop-March 1, 1984, you generally must include thefor $800. The face amount of the bond was erty. Your holding period determines whetherOID in your income currently, and your gain or$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time any capital gain or loss was a short-term orloss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalthe bond was issued, the issuer had no intention long-term capital gain or loss.gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was
Long term or short term.If you hold invest-plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-callable at its face amount beginning 10 years
ment property more than 1 year, any capital gainals and all of the following requirements are met.after the issue date.
or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If youThe issuer redeemed the bond at the end of
hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain1. The lender is not in the business of lending11 years (July 1, 2005) for its face amount of
or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.money.$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The
To determine how long you held the invest-OID earned during the time you held the bond,2. The amount of the loan, plus the amount ofment property, begin counting on the date after$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 orthe day you acquired the property. The day youinterest also is not taxable. However, you mustless. disposed of the property is part of your holdingreport the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a
period.3. Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-capital gain.
cipal purposes of the loan.Long-term debt instruments issued after Example. If you bought investment property
If the exception applies, or the obligation was1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July on February 5, 2004, and sold it on February 5,
issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you 2005, your holding period is not more than 1
the OID in your income currently. When you sellsell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these year and you have a short-term capital gain or
or redeem the obligation, the part of your gaindebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2005, your
more than your ratable share of the OID at thethat is not more than your accrued share of theholding period is more than 1 year and you will
time of the sale or redemption is ordinary in-OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofhave a long-term capital gain or loss.
come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If,the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on theSecurities traded on established market.however, there was an intention to call the debtsale or redemption is capital loss. For securities traded on an established securi-instrument before maturity, all of your gain that is
ties market, your holding period begins the daynot more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-
after the trade date you bought the securities,nary income at the time of the sale. This treat-Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt and ends on the trade date you sold them.ment of taxable gain also applies to corporateFinancial Institutioninstruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a Do not confuse the trade date with the
written commitment that was binding on May 27,If you lose money you have on deposit in a settlement date, which is the date by
1969, and at all times thereafter. which the stock must be delivered andqualified financial institution that becomes insol-CAUTION
!
payment must be made.vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductLong-term debt instruments issued after
your loss in one of three ways.May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
Example. You are a cash method, calendarernment instrument).If you hold one of these
year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-1. Ordinary loss,debt instruments, you must include a part of the
cember 29, 2005. According to the rules of theOID in your gross income each year that you2. Casualty loss, or stock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-
3. Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onstrument is increased by the amount of OID that
January 4, 2006. You received payment of theloss).you have included in your gross income. See
sales price on that same day. Report your gainOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 7 forFor more information, see Deposit in Insolventon your 2005 return, even though you receivedinformation about the OID that you must reportor Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 ofthe payment in 2006. The gain is long term oron your tax return. Publication 550. short term depending on whether you held theIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before stock more than 1 year. Your holding periodmaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if ended on December 29. If you had sold theat the time the instrument was originally issuedSale of Annuity stock at a loss, you would also report it on yourthere was an intention to call it before its matur- 2005 return.ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theThe part of any gain on the sale of an annuity
extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountscontract before its maturity date that is based onAutomatic investment service.In determin-
of OID previously includible in your income. Ininterest accumulated on the contract is ordinary ing your holding period for shares bought by the
this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. bank or other agent, full shares are consideredincome.
bought first and any fractional shares are con-Market discount bonds.If the debt instru- sidered bought last. Your holding period startsment has market discount and you chose to on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aLosses on Section 1244 (Smallinclude the discount in income as it accrued, share was bought over more than one purchaseBusiness) Stockincrease your basis in the debt instrument by the date, your holding period for that share is a splitaccrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on holding period. A part of the share is considered You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanits disposition. If you did not choose to include to have been bought on each date that stockas a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, orthe discount in income as it accrued, you must was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report thereport gain as ordinary interest income up to the available funds.loss on Form 4797, line 10.instrument’s accrued market discount. The rest
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalof the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investment
Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.property in a trade for other investment property
Report the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).A different rule applies to market discount and your basis for the new property is deter-
See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur- mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the
Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.chased by you before May 1, 1993. See Market old property, your holding period for the new
Page 98 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 101 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property begins on the day following the date taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generallyRollover of Gain Fromyou acquired the old property. cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
Publicly Traded Securitiessalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
Property received as a gift.If you receive aand similar items.
gift of property and your basis is determined by You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding period gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-is considered to have started on the same day This means that if you buy certain replacementness bad debts as short-term capital losses onthe donor’s holding period started. property and make the choice described in thisSchedule D (Form 1040).If your basis is determined by the fair market section, you postpone part or all of your gain.On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the namevalue of the property, your holding period starts You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisof the debtor and “statement attached” in col-on the day after the date of the gift. of the replacement property as described in Ba-umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in
sis of replacement property, later. Thisparentheses in column (f). Use a separate lineInherited property.If you inherit investment
postpones your gain until the year you disposefor each bad debt.property, your capital gain or loss on any later
of the replacement property.disposition of that property is treated as aFor each bad debt, attach a statement to
long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-your return that contains: You qualify to make this choice if you meet
gardless of how long you actually held the prop- all the following tests.
1. A description of the debt, including theerty.
amount, and the date it became due, 1. You sell publicly traded securities at aReal property bought. To figure how long gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-2. The name of the debtor, and any businessyou have held real property bought under an ties traded on an established securitiesor family relationship between you and theunconditional contract, begin counting on the market.debtor,day after you received title to it or on the day
after you took possession of it and assumed the 2. Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.3. The efforts you made to collect the debt,
burdens and privileges of ownership, whicheverand 3. During the 60-day period beginning on thehappened first. However, taking delivery or pos- date of the sale, you buy replacement4. Why you decided the debt was worthless.session of real property under an option agree- property. This replacement property mustFor example, you could show that the bor-ment is not enough to start the holding period.
be either common stock or a partnershiprower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-The holding period cannot start until there is an
interest in a specialized small business in-gal action to collect would probably notactual contract of sale. The holding period of the
vestment company (SSBIC). This is anyresult in payment of any part of the debt.seller cannot end before that time.
partnership or corporation licensed by the
Filing a claim for refund. If you do notStock dividends.The holding period for stock Small Business Administration under sec-
you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsdeduct a bad debt on your original return for thetion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-
on the date of distribution. year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,
The holding period for new stock you re-for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do1993.
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onthis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for
the same day as the holding period of the oldthe year the debt became worthless. You must
stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired infile it within 7 years from the date your originalAmount of gain recognized.If you make the
a “spin-off,” which is a distribution of stock orreturn for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearschoice described in this section, you must rec-
securities in a controlled corporation. from the date you paid the tax, whichever isognize gain only up to the following amount.
later. For more information about filing a claim,Nontaxable stock rights.Your holding periodsee Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in 1. The amount realized on the sale, minusfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the samechapter 1.day as the holding period of the underlying 2. The cost of any common stock or partner-
stock. The holding period for stock acquired ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtAdditional information.For more informa-through the exercise of stock rights begins on during the 60-day period beginning on thetion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publicationthe date the right was exercised. date of sale (and did not previously take550. For information on business bad debts, seeinto account on an earlier sale of publiclychapter 11 of Publication 535, Business Ex- traded securities).Nonbusiness Bad Debts penses.
If this amount is less than the amount of yourIf someone owes you money that you cannot gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,Wash Salescollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to subject to the limit described next. If this amountdeduct the amount owed to you when you figure is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesyour tax for the year the debt becomes worth- you must recognize the full amount of your gain.of stock or securities in a wash sale.less.
A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradeBad debts that did not come from operating Limit on gain postponed.The amount of
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysyour trade or business are nonbusiness bad gain you can postpone each year is limited to the
before or after the sale you:debts and are deductible as short-term capital smaller of:
losses. To be deductible, nonbusiness bad
1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-debts must be totally worthless. You cannot de- 1. $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andties,duct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt. file a separate return), or
2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-2. $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married andGenuine debt required.A debt must be gen- curities in a fully taxable trade, or file a separate return), minus the amountuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if
3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-it arises from a debtor-creditor relationship of gain you postponed for all earlier years.
based on a valid and enforceable obligation to stantially identical stock or securities.
repay a fixed or determinable sum of money.If your loss was disallowed because of theBasis of replacement property.You mustwash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theBasis in bad debt required.To deduct a bad subtract the amount of postponed gain from thecost of the new stock or securities. The result isdebt, you must have a basis in it — that is, you basis of your replacement property.your basis in the new stock or securities. Thismust have already included the amount in your
adjustment postpones the loss deduction untilincome or loaned out your cash. For example,
the disposition of the new stock or securities.How to report and postpone gain.  Seeyou cannot claim a bad debt deduction for
For more information, see Wash Sales, in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how tocourt-ordered child support not paid to you by
chapter 4 of Publication 550.your former spouse. If you are a cash method report and postpone the gain.
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items
You may want to see: Figuring Gain or Loss15. Publication To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your
main home, you must know the selling price, the❏ 523 Selling Your Home amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub-
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time tract the adjusted basis from the amount real-Selling Your
Homeowners ized to get your gain or loss.
Home Selling priceForm (and Instructions)
− Selling expenses
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
Amount realizedand LossesWhat’s New
❏ 8822 Change of Address Amount realized
− Adjusted basisKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. ❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
This Act provides tax relief for persons affected Subsidy Gain or loss
by Hurricane Katrina. Under this Act, some of
the rules that determine when to recapture a
federal mortgage subsidy have changed. See
Selling Price
Publication 4492.
The selling price is the total amount you receiveMain Home for your home. It includes money, all notes,
mortgages, or other debts assumed by theThis section explains the term “main home.”buyer as part of the sale, and the fair marketReminders Usually, the home you live in most of the time isvalue of any other property or any services youyour main home and can be a: receive.Change of address. If you change your mail-• House,ing address, be sure to notify the IRS using Payment by employer. You may have to sell• Houseboat,Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to the your home because of a job transfer. If yourInternal Revenue Service Center for your old• Mobile home, employer pays you for a loss on the sale or foraddress. (Addresses for the Service Centers are your selling expenses, do not include the pay-• Cooperative apartment, oron the back of the form.) ment as part of the selling price. Your employer• Condominium. will include it as wages in box 1 of your FormHome sold with undeducted points.If you
W-2 and you will include it on Form 1040, line 7.have not deducted all the points you paid toTo exclude gain under the rules of this chap-secure a mortgage on your old home, you mayter, you generally must have owned and lived inbe able to deduct the remaining points in the Option to buy. If you grant an option to buythe property as your main home for at least 2year of the sale. See Mortgage ending early your home and the option is exercised, add theyears during the 5-year period ending on theunder Points in chapter 23. amount you receive for the option to the sellingdate of sale. price of your home. If the option is not exercised,
Land. If you sell the land on which your mainyou must report the amount as ordinary income
home is located, but not the house itself, youin the year the option expires. Report this
cannot exclude any gain you have from the saleamount on Form 1040, line 21.Introduction of the land.
This chapter explains the tax rules that apply Form 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S,when you sell your main home. Generally, yourExample. On March 4, 2005, you sell theProceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2main home is the one in which you live most ofland on which your main home is located. You(gross proceeds) should show the total amountthe time. buy another piece of land and move your houseyou received for your home.If you sold your main home in 2005, you mayto it. This sale is not considered a sale of yourHowever, box 2 will not include the fair mar-be able to exclude from income any gain up to amain home, and you cannot exclude any gain onket value of any property other than cash orlimit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return inthe sale of the land. notes, or any services, you received or will re-most cases). See Excluding the Gain, later. If ceive. Instead, box 4 will be checked to indicateMore than one home. If you have more thanyou can exclude all of the gain, you do not need your receipt (or expected receipt) of these items.one home, you can exclude gain only from theto report the sale on your tax return. If you can exclude the entire gain, the personsale of your main home. You must include inIf you have gain that cannot be excluded, it is responsible for closing the sale generally will notincome the gain from the sale of any othertaxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). have to report it on Form 1099-S. If you do nothome. If you have two homes and live in both ofYou may also have to include Form 4797, Sales receive Form 1099-S, use sale documents andthem, your main home is ordinarily the one youof Business Property. See Reporting the Sale, other records to figure the total amount youlive in most of the time.later. received for your home.If you have a loss on the sale, you cannotExample 1. You own and live in a house indeduct it on your return. the city. You also own a beach house, which youAmount RealizedThe main topics in this chapter are: use during summer months. The house in the
city is your main home.• Figuring gain or loss, The amount realized is the selling price minus
selling expenses.• Basis, Example 2. You own a house, but you live in
another house that you rent. The rented house is• Excluding the gain, Selling expenses.Selling expenses include:your main home.• Ownership and use tests, and • Commissions,Property used partly as your main home.If• Reporting the sale. you use only part of the property as your main• Advertising fees,
home, the rules discussed in this chapter applyOther topics include: • Legal fees, andonly to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of• Business use or rental of home, and the property. For details, see Business Use or • Loan charges paid by the seller, such as
• Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy.Rental of Home, later. loan placement fees or “points.”
Page 100 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 103 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
estate dealer accepted your old home as aAdjusted BasisAdjusted Basis trade-in and allowed you $50,000 toward a new
Adjusted basis is your basis increased or de-home priced at $80,000. This is treated as a saleWhile you owned your home, you may have creased by certain amounts.of your old home for $50,000 with a gain ofmade adjustments (increases or decreases) to
$9,000 ($50,000 – $41,000).the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter-
Increases to basis.These include any:If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 andmined before you can figure gain or loss on the
assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 onsale of your home. For information on how to • Additions and other improvements thatyour old home, your sales price would still befigure your home’s adjusted basis, see Deter- have a useful life of more than 1 year,$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus themining Basis, later.
• Special assessments for local improve-$23,000 mortgage assumed).
ments, andAmount of Gain or Loss Transfer to spouse.If you transfer your home• Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-to your spouse, or to your former spouse inci-To figure the amount of gain or loss, compare store damaged property.dent to your divorce, you generally have no gainthe amount realized to the adjusted basis.
or loss. This is true even if you receive cash orGain on sale. If the amount realized is more Decreases to basis.These include any:other consideration for the home. Therefore, thethan the adjusted basis, the difference is a gainrules in this chapter do not apply. • Gain you postponed from the sale of aand, except for any part you can exclude, gener-
previous home before May 7, 1997,More information.If you need more infor-ally is taxable.
mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication • Deductible casualty losses,Loss on sale. If the amount realized is less523 and Property Settlements in Publicationthan the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss. • Insurance payments you received or ex-504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.A loss on the sale of your main home cannot be pect to receive for casualty losses,
deducted. • Payments you received for granting anDetermining Basis
Jointly owned home. If you and your spouse easement or right-of-way,
sell your jointly owned home and file a jointYou need to know your basis in your home to• Depreciation allowed or allowable if youreturn, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-determine any gain or loss when you sell it. Yourused your home for business or rental pur-payer. basis in your home is determined by how you gotposes,the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it orSeparate returns.If you file separate re-built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri-• Residential energy credit (generally al-turns, each of you must figure your own gain ortance, gift, etc.), its basis is either its fair marketlowed from 1977 through 1987) claimedloss according to your ownership interest in thevalue when you got it or the adjusted basis of thefor the cost of energy improvements thathome. Your ownership interest is determined byperson you got it from. you added to the basis of your home,state law.
While you owned your home, you may have • Adoption credit you claimed for improve-Joint owners not married.If you and a made adjustments (increases or decreases) toments added to the basis of your home,joint owner other than your spouse sell youryour home’s basis. The result of these adjust-jointly owned home, each of you must figure • Nontaxable payments from an adoptionments is your home’s adjusted basis, which isyour own gain or loss according to your owner- assistance program of your employer thatused to figure gain or loss on the sale of yourship interest in the home. Each of you applies you used for improvements you added tohome. See Adjusted Basis, later.the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ- the basis of your home,You can find more information on basis andual basis. adjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication• First-time homebuyer credit (allowed to
and in Publication 523. certain first-time buyers of a home in theOther Dispositions District of Columbia), and
The following rules apply to foreclosures and • Energy conservation subsidy excludedCost As Basisrepossessions, abandonments, trades, and from your gross income because you re-
transfers to a spouse. ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-The cost of property is the amount you pay for it
lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyin cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv-Foreclosure or repossession.If your home energy conservation measure. An energyices.was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a conservation measure is an installation orsale. modification that is primarily designed ei-Purchase. If you buy your home, your basis isYou figure the gain or loss from the sale in ther to reduce consumption of electricity orits cost to you. This includes the purchase pricegenerally the same way as gain or loss from any natural gas or to improve the managementand certain settlement or closing costs. Gener-sale. But the amount of your gain or loss de- of energy demand for a home.ally, your purchase price includes your downpends, in part, on whether you were personally
payment and any debt, such as a first or secondliable for repaying the debt secured by the
mortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay-home. See Publication 523 for more information. Improvements. These add to the value of
ment for the home. If you build, or contract toyour home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it toForm 1099-A and Form 1099-C.Generally, build, a new home, your purchase price cannew uses. You add the cost of additions andyou will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition orinclude costs of construction, as discussed inother improvements to the basis of your prop-Abandonment of Secured Property, from yourPublication 523. erty.lender. This form will have the information you
need to determine the amount of your gain orSettlement fees or closing costs.When you Examples. Putting a recreation room or an-loss and any ordinary income from cancellationbought your home, you may have paid settle-other bathroom in your unfinished basement,of debt. If your debt is canceled, you may re-ment fees or closing costs in addition to theputting up a new fence, putting in new plumbingceive Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt. contract price of the property. You can include inor wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your
Abandonment. If you abandon your home, your basis some of the settlement fees andunpaved driveway are improvements. An addi-
you may have ordinary income. If the aban-closing costs you paid for buying the home. Yoution to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-
doned home secures a debt for which you arecannot include in your basis the fees and costsroom, or a garage, is also an improvement.
personally liable and the debt is canceled, youfor getting a mortgage loan. A fee paid for buying
have ordinary income equal to the amount of thethe home is any fee you would have had to payRepairs. These maintain your home in goodcanceled debt. See Publication 523 for moreeven if you paid cash for the home. condition but do not add to its value or prolonginformation. Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement feesits life. You do not add their cost to the basis of
and closing costs that you can include in theyour property.Trading homes. If you trade your old home forbasis of property, including your home. It alsoanother home, treat the trade as a sale and a
lists some settlement costs that cannot be in-Examples. Repainting your house inside orpurchase.
cluded in basis. outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing
Also see Publication 523 for additional itemsleaks or plastering, and replacing broken win-Example. You owned and lived in a home
and a discussion of basis other than cost.dow panes are examples of repairs.that had an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 101

Page 104 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping.  You should keep Ownership and use tests met at differentOwnership and Use Testsrecords to prove your home’s ad- times. You can meet the ownership and use
justed basis. Ordinarily, you must tests during different 2-year periods. However,RECORDS
To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own-keep records for 3 years after the due date for you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-ership and use tests. This means that during thefiling your return for the tax year in which you riod ending on the date of the sale.5-year period ending on the date of the sale, yousold your home. But if you sold a home beforemust have: Example. In 1996, Helen Jones lived in aMay 7, 1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the
rented apartment. The apartment building wasbasis of that home affects the basis of the new• Owned the home for at least 2 years (the
later changed to a condominium, and shehome you bought. Keep records proving the ownership test), and
bought her apartment on December 3, 2002. Inbasis of both homes as long as they are needed• Lived in the home as your main home for2003, Helen became ill and on April 14 of thatfor tax purposes. at least 2 years (the use test). year she moved to her daughter’s home. On JulyThe records you should keep include: 12, 2005, while still living in her daughter’s
home, she sold her apartment.Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-
erty as your main home for less than 2 years,Helen can exclude gain on the sale of her• Proof of the home’s purchase price and
apartment because she met the ownership andyou can still claim an exclusion in some cases.purchase expenses,
use tests. Her 5-year period is from July 13,The maximum amount you can claim will be• Receipts and other records for all improve- 2000, to July 12, 2005, the date she sold thereduced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion,ments, additions, and other items that af- apartment. She owned her apartment from De-later.fect the home’s adjusted basis, cember 3, 2002, to July 12, 2005 (more than 2
years). She lived in the apartment from July 13,Example 1—home owned and occupied• Any worksheets you used to figure the ad-
2000 (the beginning of the 5-year period), tofor 3 years.Amanda bought and moved intojusted basis of the home you sold, the
April 14, 2003 (more than 2 years).gain or loss on the sale, the exclusion, andher main home in September 2002. She sold the
the taxable gain, home at a gain on September 15, 2005. During
the 5-year period ending on the date of saleCooperative apartment.If you sold stock in a• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, that(September 16, 2000 – September 15, 2005),cooperative housing corporation, the ownershipyou filed to postpone gain from the sale of and use tests are met if, during the 5-year periodshe owned and lived in the home for 3 years.a previous home before May 7, 1997, and ending on the date of sale, you:She meets the ownership and use tests.
• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form
• Owned the stock for at least 2 years, and2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home Example 2—met ownership test but not
Sold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- use test. Dan bought a home in 1999. After • Lived in the house or apartment that thements Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- living in it for 6 months, he moved out. He neverstock entitles you to occupy as your mainstructions. lived in the home again and sold it at a gain onhome for at least 2 years.
June 28, 2005. He owned the home during the
entire 5-year period ending on the date of saleMembers of the uniformed services or For-(June 29, 2000 – June 28, 2005). However, heeign Service. You can choose to have thedid not live in it for the required 2 years. He5-year test period for ownership and use sus-Excluding the Gain meets the ownership test but not the use test.pended during any period you or your spouseHe cannot exclude any part of his gain on theserve on “qualified official extended duty” as aYou may qualify to exclude from your income allsale, unless he qualified for a reduced maximummember of the uniformed services or Foreignor part of any gain from the sale of your mainexclusion (explained later). Service of the United States. This means thathome. This means that, if you qualify, you will you may be able to meet the 2-year use testnot have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit even if, because of your service, you did notdescribed under Maximum Exclusion, next. To Period of Ownership and Use actually live in your home for at least the re-qualify, you must meet the ownership and use quired 2 years during the 5-year period endingtests described later. The required 2 years of ownership and use dur-on the date of sale.You can choose not to take the exclusion bying the 5-year period ending on the date of theIf this helps you qualify to exclude gain, youincluding the gain from the sale in your grosssale do not have to be continuous. can choose to have the 5-year test period sus-income on your tax return for the year of the You meet the tests if you can show that youpended by filing a return for the year of sale thatsale. owned and lived in the property as your maindoes not include the gain.home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365
× 2) during the 5-year period ending on the dateMaximum Exclusion Example. David bought and moved into aof sale. home in 1997. He lived in it as his main home forYou can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain on 21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live inthe sale of your main home if all of the followingTemporary absence. Short temporary ab- it because he was on qualified official extendedare true. sences for vacations or other seasonal ab-duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a
sences, even if you rent out the property duringgain in 2005. To meet the use test, David• You meet the ownership test. the absences, are counted as periods of use.chooses to suspend the 5-year test period for
• You meet the use test. the 6 years he was on qualifying official ex-
Example. Professor Paul Beard, who is sin-tended duty. This means he can disregard those• During the 2-year period ending on thegle, bought and moved into a house on August 6 years. Therefore, David’s 5-year test perioddate of the sale, you did not exclude gain consists of the 5 years before he went on quali-28, 2002. He lived in it as his main home contin-from the sale of another home. fying official extended duty. He meets the own-uously until January 5, 2004, when he went
ership and use tests because he owned andabroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. During partYou can exclude up to $500,000 of the gain on lived in the home for 21/2 years during this testof the period of leave, the house was unoccu-the sale of your main home if all of the following period.pied, and during the rest of the period, he rentedare true.
it. On January 6, 2005, he sold the house at aPeriod of suspension.The period of sus-
• You are married and file a joint return forgain. pension cannot last more than 10 years. To-
the year. Because his leave was not a short temporarygether, the 10-year suspension period and the
absence, he cannot include the period of leave5-year test period can be as long as, but no• Either you or your spouse meets the own-
to meet the 2-year use test. He cannot excludemore than, 15 years. You cannot suspend theership test.
5-year period for more than one property at aany part of his gain, unless he qualifies for a• Both you and your spouse meet the use time. You can revoke your choice to suspend thereduced maximum exclusion (explained later).test. 5-year period at any time.Even if he does qualify for a reduced maximum
exclusion, he cannot exclude the part of the gain• During the 2-year period ending on the For more information about the suspension
equal to the depreciation he claimed (or coulddate of the sale, neither you nor your of the 5-year test period, see Members of the
have claimed) while renting the house. See De-spouse excluded gain from the sale of an- uniformed services or Foreign Service in Publi-
other home. preciation after May 6, 1997, later. cation 523.
Page 102 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 105 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for individuals with a disability. rented from June 1, 2001, to March 31, 2003.Reduced Maximum Amy moved back into the house on April 1,There is an exception to the use test if during the
Exclusion 2003, and lived there until she sold it on January5-year period before the sale of your home:
30, 2005. During the 5-year period ending on the
You can claim an exclusion, but the maximum• You become physically or mentally unable date of the sale (January 31, 2000 – January
amount of gain you can exclude will be reduced,to care for yourself, and 30, 2005), Amy owned and lived in the house for
if either of the following is true. more than 2 years as shown in the table below.• You owned and lived in your home as your
main home for a total of at least 1 year.1. You did not meet the ownership and use Five Year Used as Used astests, but the reason you sold the home Period  Home  RentalUnder this exception, you are considered to livewas:in your home during any time that you own the  1/31/00 –
home and live in a facility (including a nursing 5/31/01 16 monthsa. A change in place of employment,
home) that is licensed by a state or political  6/1/01 –b. Health, orsubdivision to care for persons in your condition. 3/31/03  22 monthsc. Unforeseen circumstances (as definedIf you meet this exception to the use test, you  4/1/03 –later).still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership 1/30/05 22 months
test to claim the exclusion. 38 months 22 months2. Your exclusion would have been disal-
lowed because of the rule described inAmy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However,
More Than One Home Sold During 2-Yearshe generally cannot exclude the part of the gainPrevious home destroyed or condemned.
Period, later, except that the reason youequal to the depreciation she claimed or couldFor the ownership and use tests, you add the
sold the home was: have claimed for renting the house, as explainedtime you owned and lived in a previous home
after Example 2.that was destroyed or condemned to the time a. A change in place of employment,you owned and lived in the home on which you
Example 2. William owned and used ab. Health, orwish to exclude gain. This rule applies if any part house as his main home from 1999 throughof the basis of the home you sold depended onc. Unforeseen circumstances (as defined2002. On January 1, 2003, he moved to anotherthe basis of the destroyed or condemned home. next). state. He rented his house from that date untilOtherwise, you must have owned and lived in April 30, 2005, when he sold it. During the 5-yearthe same home for 2 of the 5 years before theUse Worksheet 3 in Publication 523 to figureperiod ending on the date of sale (May 1, 2000 –sale to qualify for the exclusion. your reduced maximum exclusion. April 30, 2005), William owned and lived in the
house for 32 months (more than 2 years). HeUnforeseen circumstances.The sale of your
must report the sale on Form 4797. He canmain home is because of an unforeseen circum-Married Persons exclude gain up to $250,000. However, he gen-stance if your primary reason for the sale is the
erally cannot exclude the part of the gain equaloccurrence of an event that you could not rea-If you and your spouse file a joint return for the to the depreciation he claimed or could havesonably have anticipated before buying and oc-year of sale, you can exclude gain if either claimed for renting the house, as explained next.cupying your main home. For more informationspouse meets the ownership and use tests. (Buton unforeseen circumstances, see Publicationsee Maximum Exclusion, earlier.) Depreciation after May 6, 1997.If you were523. entitled to take depreciation deductions be-
Example 1—one spouse sells a home. cause you used your home for business pur-
Emily sells her home in June 2005. She marries poses or as rental property, you cannot excludeMore Than One Home Sold
the part of your gain equal to any depreciationJamie later in the year. She meets the owner-During 2-Year Period allowed as a deduction for periods after May 6,ship and use tests, but Jamie does not. She can
1997. If you can show by adequate records orexclude up to $250,000 of gain on a separate orYou cannot exclude gain on the sale of yourother evidence that the depreciation allowedjoint return for 2005. home if, during the 2-year period ending on thewas less than the amount allowable, the amountdate of the sale, you sold another home at a gainyou cannot exclude is the amount allowed.Example 2—each spouse sells a home. and excluded all or part of that gain. If you
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except cannot exclude the gain, you must include it inProperty used partly for business or rental.that Jamie also sells a home in 2005. He meetsyour income. If you used property partly as a home and partly
the ownership and use tests on his home. Emily for business or to produce income, see Publica-Exception. You still can claim an exclusion,and Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of tion 523.but the maximum amount of gain you can ex-gain. clude will be reduced, if the reason you sold the
home was:
Death of spouse before sale.If your spouse • A change in place of employment, Reporting the Saledied and you did not remarry before the date of
• Health, orsale, you are considered to have owned and
lived in the property as your main home during• Unforeseen circumstances (as defined
any period of time when your spouse owned and Do not report the 2005 sale of your main homeearlier).
lived in it as a main home. on your tax return unless:For more information about this exception, see
• You have a gain and you do not qualify toMore Than One Home Sold During 2-Year Pe-
exclude all of it, orHome transferred from spouse. If your riod in Publication 523.
home was transferred to you by your spouse (or • You have a gain and you choose not toformer spouse if the transfer was incident to exclude it.
divorce), you are considered to have owned it
during any period of time when your spouse If you have any taxable gain on the sale ofBusiness Use or
owned it. your main home that cannot be excluded, report
the entire gain realized on Schedule D (FormRental of Home
1040). Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 ofUse of home after divorce.You are consid- Schedule D, depending on how long you ownedYou may be able to exclude your gain from theered to have used property as your main home the home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show itsale of a home that you have used for businessduring any period when: on the line directly below the line on which youor to produce rental income. But you must meet
report the gain. Write “Section 121 exclusion” inthe ownership and use tests.• You owned it, and column (a) of that line and show the amount of
• Your spouse or former spouse is allowedExample 1. On May 29, 1999, Amy bought the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren-
to live in it under a divorce or separationa house. She moved in on that date and lived in theses).
instrument and uses it as his or her mainit until May 31, 2001, when she moved out of the If you used the home for business or to
home. house and put it up for rent. The house was produce rental income, you may have to use
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 103

Page 106 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Like-kind exchange of property used partly Loans subject to recapture rules.The re-Form 4797 to report the sale of the business or
capture applies to loans that:for business. If you use your main homerental part (or the sale of the entire property if
partly for business or rental purposes and thenused entirely for business or rental in that year). 1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort-exchange the home for another property, seeSee Business Use or Rental of Home in Publica- gage bonds, orPublication 523.tion 523.
2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi-
cates.Expatriates.You cannot claim the exclusion ifInstallment sale.Some sales are made underthe expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria-arrangements that provide for part or all of the The recapture also applies to assumptions oftion tax applies to U.S. citizens who have re-selling price to be paid in a later year. These these loans.nounced their citizenship (and long-termsales are called “installment sales.” If you fi- When the recapture applies.The recaptureresidents who have ended their residency) if onenance the buyer’s purchase of your home your- of the federal mortgage subsidy applies only ifof their principal purposes was to avoid U.S.self, instead of having the buyer get a loan or you meet both of the following conditions. taxes. For more information about the expatria-mortgage from a bank, you probably have antion tax, see chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.1. You sell or otherwise dispose of yourinstallment sale. You may be able to report theTax Guide for Aliens. home:part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in-
stallment basis. Home destroyed or condemned. If your a. At a gain, andUse Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, tohome was destroyed or condemned, any gain b. During the first 9 years after the datereport the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15(for example, because of insurance proceeds you closed your mortgage loan.of Form 6252. you received) qualifies for the exclusion.
Any part of the gain that cannot be excludedSeller-financed mortgage.If you sell your 2. Your income for the year of disposition is(because it is more than the limit) may be post-more than that year’s adjusted qualifyinghome and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-poned under the rules explained in: income for your family size for that yearcial agreement, the payments you receive gen-
(related to the income requirements a per-erally consist of both interest and principal. You• Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, son must meet to qualify for the federallymust report the interest you receive as part ofand Thefts, in the case of a home that wassubsidized program).each payment separately as interest income. If destroyed, or
the buyer of your home uses the property as a• Publication 544, in the case of a home thatWhen recapture does not apply.The recap-main or second home, you must also report thewas condemned. ture does not apply if any of the following situa-name, address, and social security number tions apply to you:(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule BSale of remainder interest.Subject to the • Your mortgage loan was a qualified home(Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). Theother rules in this chapter, you can choose toimprovement loan of not more thanbuyer must give you his or her SSN and youexclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-$15,000,must give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meetest in your home. If you make this choice, youthese requirements may result in a $50 penalty • The home is disposed of as a result ofcannot choose to exclude gain from your sale offor each failure. If you or the buyer does not your death,any other interest in the home that you sellhave and is not eligible to get an SSN, seeseparately. • You dispose of the home more than 9Social Security Number in chapter 1. years after the date you closed your mort-Exception for sales to related persons. gage loan,More information.For more information onYou cannot exclude gain from the sale of a
installment sales, see Publication 537, Install-remainder interest in your home to a related• You transfer the home to your spouse, orment Sales. person. Related persons include your brothersto your former spouse incident to a di-
and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,vorce, where no gain is included in your
spouse, ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),income,
and lineal descendants (children, grandchildren,• You dispose of the home at a loss,etc.). Related persons also include certain cor-Special Situations porations, partnerships, trusts, and exempt or-• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and
ganizations. you repair it or replace it on its original siteThe situations that follow may affect your exclu- within 2 years after the end of the tax yearsion. when the destruction happened, or
• You refinance your mortgage loan (unlessSale of home acquired in like-kind exchange.
Recapturing (Paying you later meet all of the conditions listedYou cannot claim the exclusion if:
previously under When the recapture ap-
Back) a Federal plies).1. You acquired your home in a like-kind ex-
change (also known as a section 1031 ex-
Mortgage Subsidychange), and Notice of amounts. At or near the time of
settlement of your mortgage loan, you should2. You sold the home: If you financed your home under a federallyreceive a notice that provides the federally sub-subsidized program (loans from tax-exempta. After October 22, 2004, and sidized amount and other information you willqualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort-need to figure your recapture tax.b. During the 5-year period beginning withgage credit certificates), you may have to recap-
the date you acquired the home. ture (pay back) all or part of the benefit youHow to figure and report the recapture.The
received from that program when you sell orrecapture tax is figured on Form 8828, Recap-
To defer gain from a like-kind exchange, youotherwise dispose of your home. You recaptureture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If you sell
must have exchanged business or investmentthe benefit by increasing your federal income taxyour home and your mortgage is subject to re-
property for business or investment property offor the year of the sale. You may have to pay thiscapture rules, you must file Form 8828 even if
a like kind. For more information about recapture tax even if you can exclude your gainyou do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Form
like-kind exchanges, see Publication 544,from income under the rules discussed earlier;8828 to your Form 1040. For more information,
that exclusion does not affect the recapture tax.Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets. see Form 8828 and its instructions.
Page 104 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 107 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for 2005 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S name but actually belong to someone else),
(or on substitute statements): report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the
proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol-
1. Proceeds from transactions involving lowing amounts reported to you for 2005 on16. stocks, bonds, and other securities, andForms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-
ments) that you are not reporting on another2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
form or schedule included with your return:tions (other than the sale of your main
home if you had no taxable gain) not re-Reporting Gains 1. Proceeds from transactions involvingported on another form or schedule. stocks, bonds, and other securities, and
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andand Losses 2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-10, attach a statement to your return explainingtions (other than the sale of your mainthe difference. home if you are not required to report it).
Installment sales.You cannot use the install-If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total ofIntroduction ment method to report a gain from the sale oflines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your returnstock or securities traded on an established se-This chapter discusses how to report capital explaining the reason for the difference.curities market. You must report the entire gaingains and losses from sales, exchanges, and File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with thein the year of sale (the year in which the tradeother dispositions of investment property on IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-date occurs).Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in- nee in 2005, you must file a Form 1099-B orcludes: Passive activity gains and losses.If you Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.have gains or losses from a passive activity, you• How to report short-term gains and losses, Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with amay also have to report them on Form 8582. InForm 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of• How to report long-term gains and losses,some cases, the loss may be limited under theU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its• How to figure capital loss carryovers, nue Service Center by February 28, 2006separate instructions for more information about(March 31, 2006, if you file Form 1099-B or Form• How to figure your tax on a net capitalreporting capital gains and losses from a pas-1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner ofgain, and sive activity. the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or
• An illustrated example of how to complete Form 1099-S by January 31, 2006. On FormForm 1099-B transactions.If you sold prop-
Schedule D. 1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” Theerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-
other owner should be listed as the “Recipient.”ties, through a broker, you should receive Form
If you sell or otherwise dispose of property On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker.
used in a trade or business or for the production “Filer.” The other owner should be listed as theUse the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state-
of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other “Transferor.” You do not, however, have to file ament to complete Schedule D.
Dispositions of Assets, before completing Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceedsReport the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
Schedule D. for your spouse. For more information about theForm 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-Useful Items
see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossYou may want to see: 1098, 5498, and W-2G.proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
and option premiums were reported to the IRS,Publication Sale of property bought at various times.Ifenter that net sales price in column (d) of either
❏ 537 Installment Sales you sell a block of stock or other property thatline 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
you bought at various times, report the If the net sales price is entered in column (d),❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of short-term gain or loss from the sale on one linedo not include the commissions and option pre-Assets in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain ormiums in column (e).
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses loss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” inForm 1099-S transactions. If you sold or column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See Compre-traded reportable real estate, you generallyForm (and Instructions) hensive Example later in this chapter.should receive from the real estate reporting❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains person a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro-Sale expenses.  Add to your cost or otherand Losses ceeds. basis any expense of sale such as brokers’ fees,“Reportable real estate” is defined as any❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property commissions, state and local transfer taxes, andpresent or future ownership interest in any of theoption premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income following: column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations D, whichever applies, unless you reported the1. Improved or unimproved land, including airnet sales price amount in column (d).space, For more information about adjustments to
2. Inherently permanent structures, includingbasis, see chapter 13.
any residential, commercial, or industrial
Reporting Capital building, Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain or
loss on the sale or trade of investment property3. A condominium unit and its accessory fix-Gains and Losses held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain ortures and common elements, including loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theland, andReport capital gains and losses on Schedule D amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
(Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades of4. Stock in a cooperative housing corporationin parentheses.
stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-(as defined in section 216 of the InternalYou combine your share of short-term capital
ported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or Revenue Code). gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossA “real estate reporting person” could includeappropriate. Include all these transactions even carryover, with your other short-term capitalthe buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title orif you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds gains and losses to figure your net short-termescrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-From Broker and Barter Exchange Transac- capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringtions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realthe biggest interest in the property.Estate Transactions (or substitute statement). Long-term gains and losses.A capital gainYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuation or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-schedule to report more transactions. erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitallow the instructions for Schedule D to reportgain or loss. You report it in Part II of ScheduleBe sure to add all sales price entries in col-these transactions and include them on line 1 orD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on8 as appropriate. show it in parentheses.line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a You also report the following in Part II of
Then add the following amounts reported to you nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your Schedule D:
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 105

Page 108 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities inTable 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
2005. The sales resulted in a capital loss of
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.THEN your Their taxable income was $26,000. On their jointmaximum capital 2005 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-IF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ... used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),
can be carried over to 2006.Collectibles gain 28%
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their
Gain on qualified small business stock minus the section capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.
They would have no carryover.1202 exclusion 28%
Use short-term losses first.When you fig-Unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% ure your capital loss carryover, use your
short-term capital losses first, even if you in-Other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you25% or higher 15%
have not reached the limit on the capital loss
Other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is deduction after using the short-term capital
losses, use the long-term capital losses until youlower than 25% 5%
reach the limit.
1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, orDecedent’s capital loss.A capital lossunrecaptured section 1250 gain. sustained by a decedent during his or her last
tax year (or carried over to that year from an
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final
income tax return filed for the decedent. The
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in
Capital Losses1. Undistributed long-term capital gains from this situation. The decedent’s estate cannot de-a regulated investment company (mutual duct any of the loss or carry it over to followingIf your capital losses are more than your capitalfund) or real estate investment trust years.gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.(REIT), Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,Joint and separate returns.If you and your2. Your share of long-term capital gains orenclosed in parentheses. spouse once filed separate returns and are nowlosses from partnerships, S corporations, filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-and fiduciaries, tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital
spouse once filed a joint return and are nowloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the3. All capital gain distributions from mutual
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoverlesser of: funds and REITs not reported directly on
from the joint return can be deducted only on theline 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
1. $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file return of the spouse who actually had the loss.1040, and
a separate return), or4. Long-term capital loss carryovers.
2. Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of The result after combining these items withSchedule D. Capital Gain Tax Ratesyour other long-term capital gains and losses is
You can use your total net loss to reduceyour net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain areyour income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000Schedule D). generally lower than the tax rates that apply tolimit.Capital gain distributions only.You do other income. These lower rates are called the
not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow- maximum capital gain rates.Capital loss carryover.If you have a total neting are true. The term “net capital gain” means theloss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than
amount by which your net long-term capital gainthe yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you1. The only amounts you would have to re- for the year is more than your net short-termcan carry over the unused part to the next yearport on Schedule D are capital gain distri- capital loss.and treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextbutions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or For 2005, the maximum capital gain ratesyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you cansubstitute statement). are 5%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 forcarry it over to later years until it is completely
2. You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, details.used up.
or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substituteWhen you figure the amount of any capital If you figure your tax using the maxi-statement). loss carryover to the next year, you must take mum capital gain rates and the regu-
the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-If both of the above statements are true, report lar tax computation results in a lower
TIP
count, whether or not you claimed it.your capital gain distributions directly on line 13 tax, the regular tax computation applies.
of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,When you carry over a loss, it remains long
use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Example. All of your net capital gain is fromterm or short term. A long-term capital loss you
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldcarry over to the next tax year will reduce that
figure your tax. be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-year’s long-term capital gains before it reduces
able income is $25,000, none of your taxableYou can report your capital gain distributionsthat year’s short-term capital gains.
income will be taxed above the 15% rate. Theon line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on FormFiguring your carryover.The amount of 28% rate does not apply.1040, if both of the following are true. your capital loss carryover is the amount of your
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:1. None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute Investment interest deducted.If you claim a
statements) you received have an amount deduction for investment interest, you may have1. Your allowable capital loss deduction forin box 2b, 2c, or 2d. to reduce the amount of your net capital gainthe year, or that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.2. You do not have to file Form 1040 for any Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain2. Your taxable income increased by your al-other capital gains or losses. you choose to include in investment incomelowable capital loss deduction for the year
when figuring the limit on your investment inter-and your deduction for personal exemp-
Total net gain or loss.To figure your total net est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dtions.
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends andIf your deductions are more than your grossgain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-income for the tax year, use your negative tax-capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on tion about the limit on investment interest, seeable income in computing the amount in item (2).Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are chapter 3 of Publication 550.      
  Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.
sheet in Publication 550 to determine the part ofIf both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain or loss
your capital loss for 2005 that you can carry overForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,
to 2006.Tax Rates, later. antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
Page 106 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 109 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- (See Capital gain distributions only, ear- stock that she had bought in September 2000.
erage held more than 1 year. lier.) Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain
which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both
she held the stock more than 5 years, she has aGain on qualified small business stock.If more than zero.
you realized a gain from qualified small business $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims the
stock that you held more than 5 years, you exclusion on the line below by entering $1,500
generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain as a loss in column (f). She also enters thefrom income. The exclusion can be up to 60% exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of thefor certain empowerment zone business stock.Comprehensive 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.The gain minus your section 1202 exclusion is a
28% rate gain. See Gains on Qualified Small She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)ExampleBusiness Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550. from her broker for each of these transactions.
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally, from her job, she has income from stocks andReconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emilythis is any part of your capital gain from sellingother securities. For the 2005 tax year, she hadmakes sure that the total of the amounts re-section 1250 property (real property) that is duethe following capital gains and losses, which sheported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 shetion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the ule D is not less than the total of the amountsreceived showed net sales prices. Her filled-in28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 shown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromSchedule D is shown in this chapter.Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions her broker. For 2005, the total is $23,100.
to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Capital loss carryover from 2004.EmilyFor more information about section 1250 prop-Capital gains and losses — Schedule D.
has a capital loss carryover to 2005 of $800, oferty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 ofEmily sold stock in two different companies that
which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500Publication 544. she held for less than a year. In June, she sold
is long-term capital loss. She enters these100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Shebought in February. She had an adjusted basisTax computation using maximum capital
also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-gains rates.Use the Qualified Dividends and of $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for a
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-gain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares of
Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figureComputer Co. stock that she bought in June.sheet. Her filled-in 28% Rate Gain Worksheet is
your tax if you have qualified dividends or netShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500shown below.
capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. SheShe kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. reports these short-term transactions on line 1 inover Worksheet (not illustrated) in her 2004 edi-Part I of Schedule D.Schedule D Tax Worksheet.You must use tion of Publication 550, so she could properlythe Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the ScheduleEmily had three other stock sales that shereport her loss carryover for the 2005 tax yearD instructions to figure your tax if: reports as long-term transactions on line 8 inwithout refiguring it.Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60• You have to file Schedule D, and
Tax computation. Because Emily hasshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line gains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,the Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is she checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes tovalue at the time of his death was $2,500, whichmore than zero. became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 of
See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex-Because she had inherited the stock, her loss isthe 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18
ample of how to figure your tax using the Sched-a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andis greater than zero, she checks the “No” box onule D Tax Worksheet. her father actually held the stock. She enters theline 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheet
loss in column (f) of line 8.Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax to figure her tax.
Worksheet. If you do not have to use the In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained stock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of thoseof her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofabove) and any of the following apply, use theshares in 1994, for $1,000. She had bought 100Form 1040 through line 43. She enters theQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-more shares in 1996 for $2,200, and an addi-amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of thesheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Formtional 300 shares in 1999 for $1,500. Her total1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax. Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thebasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax is• You received qualified dividends. (See($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she$3,279. This is less than the $4,171 tax sheQualified Dividends in chapter 8.) enters in column (f) of line 8.
would have figured without the capital gain taxIn December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.• You do not have to file Schedule D and rates.for $4,100. This was qualified small businessyou received capital gain distributions.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily Jones—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1.................................................................... 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1.......................................................... 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824............................. 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............... 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),5. ( 500)box 11, code C.................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0-...................... 6. ( 550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18............................................................. 7. 450
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 107

Page 110 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040 to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or 
• Form 1040, line 43, is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43............................................. 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b...... 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4g . .3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e*4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-........ 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D....... 7. 9,350
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 9. 9,350
10. Add lines 6 and 9........................................................ 10. 9,350
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D............................... 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11........................................... 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10............................................................. 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
• The amount on line 1 or
}
•  $29,700 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 29,700$59,400 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$39,800 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15............................. 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-....... 17. 20,650
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17......................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15.............................................. /H1707519. 8,600
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05)............................................................. 20. 430
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13.............................. 21. 8,900
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-)............... 22. 8,600
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................. /H1707523. 300
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15)............................................................ 24. 45
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above.................. 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0-................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................. /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25)............................................................ 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29................................................ 31. 30,000
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1................................................. 32. 0
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28)............................................................ 33. 0
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies.... 34. 2,804
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34.......................................................... 35. 3,279
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies..... 36. 4,171
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line
36. Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44.............................................. 37. 3,279
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 108 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 111 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-05 2,100
20,200
2,500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-11-05 6-12-05 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-30-05 7-30-05 2,000 2,500
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-30-05 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500
550
400
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-28-00 12-15-05 4,100 1,100 3,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500
()
()
()
()
()
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005Cat. No. 11338H
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2005
()
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 109

Page 112 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9,350
450
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result. If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20, and
go to line 21. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13, and then go to line 17 below
16
16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-7 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-8 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of:21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040. Do not complete
lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Schedule D Tax Worksheet
on page D-9 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040.
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
Page 110 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 113 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) — chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay — chapter 18, and
• Educator expenses, student loan interest, and tuition and fees you pay—
chapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Chapter 21.
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapter 9 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Deduction for clean-fuel vehicle Chapter 12 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 111

Page 114 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For all filing statuses other than married filing
separately, the upper and lower limits of the
Remindersphaseout range increased by $5,000.
17.
Modified AGI. Beginning in 2005, the domes-Statement of required minimum distribution.
tic production activities deduction is added backIf a minimum distribution is required from your
to income when figuring modified AGI. IRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that held
the IRA at the end of the preceding year mustIndividual Modified AGI for conversion purposes.Be- either report the amount of the required mini-
ginning in 2005, modified AGI for conversionmum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it for
purposes does not include required distributionsyou. The report or offer must include the date byRetirement from IRAs. See Modified AGI under Roth IRAs. which the amount must be distributed. The re-
port is due January 31 of the year in which the
Arrangements minimum distribution is required. It can be pro-
vided with the year-end fair market value state-
ment that you normally get each year. No report
(IRAs) What’s New for 2006 is required for IRAs of owners who have died.
IRA interest.Although interest earned fromTraditional IRA contribution and deductionyour IRA is generally not taxed in the yearlimit.The contribution limit to your traditionalWhat’s New for 2005 earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do notIRA for 2006 will be the smaller of the followingreport this interest on your tax return as tax-ex-amounts: empt interest.Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
This Act provides tax relief for persons affected• $4,000, or Form 8606.  If you make nondeductible contri-by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, if you have butions to a traditional IRA and you do not file• Your taxable compensation for the year.funds in certain retirement plans, including IRAs, Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs, with your taxyou may qualify for tax-favored withdrawals and return, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.If you will be age 50 before 2007, the mostrecontributions. See Publication 4492.
that can be contributed to your traditional IRA forRoth IRA. You cannot claim a deduction forTraditional IRA contribution and deduction2006 will be the smaller of the followingany contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if youlimit.The contribution limit to your traditionalamounts: satisfy the requirements, all earnings are taxIRA for 2005 increased to the smaller of the free and neither your nondeductible contribu-following amounts: • $5,000, or tions nor any earnings on them are taxable when
you withdraw them. See Roth IRAs, later.• Your taxable compensation for the year.• $4,000, or
The term “50 or older” is used several• Your taxable compensation for the year.For more information, see How Much Can Be times in this chapter. It refers to an
Contributed. IRA owner who is age 50 or older by
TIP
If you reached age 50 before 2006, the most the end of the tax year.that could be contributed to your traditional IRARoth IRA contribution limit.If contributionsfor 2005 is the smaller of the following amounts:are made on your behalf only to Roth IRAs, your
contribution limit for 2006 will generally be the• $4,500, or lesser of:
• Your taxable compensation for the year. Introduction
• $4,000, or An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aRoth IRA contribution limit.If contributions personal savings plan that gives you tax advan-• Your taxable compensation for the year.were made on your behalf only to Roth IRAs, tages for setting aside money for your retire-your contribution limit for 2005 is generally the ment.If you will be age 50 before 2007 and contribu-lesser of: tions on your behalf are made only to Roth IRAs,This chapter discusses:
your contribution limit for 2006 will generally be• $4,000, or the lesser of: • The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA• Your taxable compensation for the year. that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA), and
• $5,000, or • The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-If you were 50 or older in 2005 and contribu-• Your taxable compensation for the year. ible contributions and tax-free distribu-tions on your behalf were made only to Roth
tions.IRAs, your contribution limit for 2005 is generallyHowever, if your modified AGI is above a certain
the lesser of: amount, your contribution limit may be reduced.Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) andFor more information, see How Much Can Be Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees• $4,500, or Contributed? under Can You Contribute to a (SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For• Your taxable compensation for the year.Roth IRA. more information on these plans and employ-
ees’ SEP-IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are partHowever, if your modified adjusted gross in-Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-of these plans, see Publications 560 and 590.come (AGI) is above a certain amount, yourbutions increased for a married couple filingcontribution limit may be reduced. a joint return.For 2006, if you are covered by
Useful Itemsa retirement plan at work, your deduction forModified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-
contributions to a traditional IRA will be reducedbutions increased.For 2005, if you were cov- You may want to see:
(phased out) if your modified adjusted grossered by a retirement plan at work, your
deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is Publicationincome (AGI) is:
reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted ❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Smallgross income (AGI) is: • More than $75,000 but less than $85,000 Businessfor a married couple filing a joint return or
• More than $70,000 but less than $80,000 ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsa qualifying widow(er),
for a married couple filing a joint return or (IRAs)• More than $50,000 but less than $60,000a qualifying widow(er),
for a single individual or head of house-Form (and Instructions)• More than $50,000 but less than $60,000 hold, orfor a single individual or head of house- ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans
• Less than $10,000 for a married individualhold, or (including IRAs) and Other
filing a separate return. Tax-Favored Accounts• Less than $10,000 for a married individual
See How Much Can You Deduct.filing a separate return. ❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs
Page 112 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 115 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Income from a partnership for which you your spouse, the most that can be contributed
do not provide services that are a material for the year to your IRA is the smaller of theTraditional IRAs income-producing factor. following amounts.
• Any amounts you exclude from income,In this chapter the original IRA (sometimes 1. $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in
such as foreign earned income and hous-called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to 2005). For 2006, the amount is $4,000 (but
ing costs.as a “traditional IRA.” Two advantages of a tradi- increases to $5,000 if you are 50 or older
tional IRA are: in 2006).
2. The total compensation includible in the• You may be able to deduct some or all ofWhen and How Can a
gross income of both you and your spouseyour contributions to it, depending on yourTraditional IRA Be Set Up? for the year, reduced by the following twocircumstances, and,
amounts.You can set up a traditional IRA at any time.• Generally, amounts in your IRA, including
However, the time for making contributions forearnings and gains, are not taxed until a. Your spouse’s IRA contribution for the
any year is limited. See When Can Contributionsthey are distributed. year to a traditional IRA.
Be Made, later. b. Any contribution for the year to a Roth  You can set up different kinds of IRAs with aIRA on behalf of your spouse.variety of organizations. You can set up an IRAWhat Is a Traditional IRA?
at a bank or other financial institution or with aThis means that the total combined contribu-A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRAmutual fund or life insurance company. You cantions that can be made for the year to your IRAor a SIMPLE IRA. also set up an IRA through your stockbroker.and your spouse’s IRA can be as much asAny IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re-$8,000 ($8,500 if only one of you is 50 or older,quirements.Who Can Set Up or $9,000 if both of you are 50 or older). For
Kinds of traditional IRAs.Your traditional2006, combined total contributions can be asa Traditional IRA? IRA can be an individual retirement account ormuch as $8,000 ($9,000 if only one of you is
annuity. It can be part of either a simplified50 or older or $10,000 if both of you are 50 orYou can set up and make contributions to a
employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-older.traditional IRA if: ployee association trust account.
• You (or, if you file a joint return, your When Can Contributionsspouse) received taxable compensationHow Much Can Beduring the year, and Be Made?Contributed?• You were not age 701/2 by the end of the As soon as you set up your traditional IRA,year. There are limits and other rules that affect thecontributions can be made to it through your
amount that can be contributed to a traditionalchosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator).
IRA. These limits and other rules are explainedContributions must be in the form of moneyWhat is compensation? Generally, compen-
below. (cash, check, or money order). Property cannotsation is what you earn from working. Compen-
be contributed.sation includes wages, salaries, tips, Community property laws. Except as dis-professional fees, bonuses, and other amountscussed later under Spousal IRA limit, each Contributions must be made by due date.you receive for providing personal services. Thespouse figures his or her limit separately, usingContributions can be made to your traditionalIRS treats as compensation any amount prop-his or her own compensation. This is the ruleIRA for a year at any time during the year or byerly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen-even in states with community property laws.the due date for filing your return for that year,sation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement,Brokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis- not including extensions. For most people, thisprovided that amount is reduced by any amountsions paid in connection with your traditional IRAmeans that contributions for 2005 must be madeproperly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans).are subject to the contribution limit. by April 17, 2006, and contributions for 2006Scholarship and fellowship payments are must be made by April 16, 2007.compensation for this purpose only if shown inTrustees’ fees.Trustees’ administrative fees
box 1 of Form W-2. are not subject to the contribution limit. Age 701/2 rule.Contributions cannot be madeCompensation also includes commissions Contributions on your behalf to yourto your traditional IRA for the year in which youand taxable alimony and separate maintenance traditional IRAs reduce your limit forreach age 701/2 or for any later year.payments. contributions to Roth IRAs. (See Roth You attain age 701/2 on the date that is sixCAUTION
!
IRAs, later.) calendar months after the 70th anniversary ofSelf-employment income. If you are
your birth. If you were born on June 30, 1935,self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner),General limit.The most that can be contrib-the 70th anniversary of your birth is June 30,compensation is the net earnings from youruted to your traditional IRA is the smaller of the2005, and you attained age 701/2 on Decembertrade or business (provided your personal serv-following amounts. 30, 2005. If you were born on July 1, 1935, theices are a material income-producing factor) re-
• $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in70th anniversary of your birth was July 1, 2005,duced by the total of:
2005). For 2006, the amount is $4,000and you attained age 701/2 on January 1, 2006.
• The deduction for contributions made on (but increases to $5,000 if you are 50 or
your behalf to retirement plans, and older). Designating year for which contribution is
made. If an amount is contributed to your• The deduction allowed for one-half of your• Your taxable compensation (defined ear-
traditional IRA between January 1 and April 15,self-employment taxes. lier) for the year.
you should tell the sponsor which year (the cur-
This is the most that can be contributed regard-rent year or the previous year) the contribution isCompensation includes earnings from less of whether the contributions are to one orfor. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it isself-employment even if they are not subject tomore traditional IRAs or whether all or part of thefor, the sponsor can assume, and report to theself-employment tax because of your religiouscontributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde- IRS, that the contribution is for the current yearbeliefs. ductible Contributions, later.) (the year the sponsor received it).
What is not compensation? Compensation Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old andFiling before a contribution is made.Youdoes not include any of the following items.single, earned $24,000 in 2005. Her IRA contri-can file your return claiming a traditional IRAbutions for 2005 are limited to $4,000. contribution before the contribution is actually• Earnings and profits from property, such
made. However, the contribution must be madeas rental income, interest income, and div-Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu-by the due date of your return, not includingidend income. dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2005.extensions.• Pension or annuity income. His IRA contributions for 2005 are limited to
$3,500, the amount of his compensation.• Deferred compensation received (com- Contributions not required.You do not have
pensation payments postponed from a Spousal IRA limit.If you file a joint return and to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax
past year). your taxable compensation is less than that of year, even if you can.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 113

Page 116 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
joint return, the deduction for contributions to theTable 17-1.Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by
traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-Retirement Plan at Work sation is limited to the lesser of the following
amounts.If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if
your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction. 1. $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in
2005). For 2006, the amount is $4,000 (but
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... increases to $5,000 if that spouse is 50 or
older in 2006). $50,000 or less a full deduction.single
2. The total compensation includible in the
more than $50,000 a partial deduction. gross income of both spouses for the yearor but less than $60,000 reduced by the following three amounts.
head of household $60,000 or more no deduction. a. The IRA deduction for the year of the
spouse with the greater compensation. $70,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly
b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-more than $70,000 a partial deduction. tion for the year made on behalf of theor but less than $80,000 spouse with the greater compensation.
qualifying widow(er) $80,000 or more no deduction. c. Any contributions for the year to a Roth
IRA on behalf of the spouse with theless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing greater compensation.separately2
$10,000 or more no deduction. This limit is reduced by any contributions to a
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with
2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purposethe lesser compensation.
(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).
Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
rated (and did not remarry) before the end of theductible as a miscellaneous itemized deductionHow Much Can You year, you cannot deduct any contributions toon Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.
your spouse’s IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-Deduct?
ration, you can deduct only contributions to yourBrokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis-
own IRA. Your deductions are subject to theGenerally, you can deduct the lesser of: sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as
rules for single individuals.such, are deductible subject to the limits.• The contributions to your traditional IRA
for the year, or Covered by an employer retirement plan.IfFull deduction.If neither you nor your spouseyou or your spouse was covered by an employer• The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,was covered for any part of the year by anretirement plan at any time during the year forif it applies). employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-which contributions were made, your deductiontion for total contributions to one or more tradi-However, if you or your spouse was covered by may be further limited. This is discussed latertional IRAs of up to the lesser of the followingan employer retirement plan, you may not be under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limitsamounts.able to deduct this amount. See Limit If Covered on the amount you can deduct do not affect the
by Employer Plan, later. amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-• $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in
ductible Contributions, later.2005). For 2006, the amount is $4,000
You may be eligible to claim a credit(but increases to $5,000 if you are 50 or
for contributions to your traditionalolder in 2006).
IRA. For more information see chap- Are You Covered by an Employer
TIP
• 100% of your compensation.ter 37. Plan?
This limit is reduced by any contributions madeTrustees’ fees.Trustees’ administrative fees The Form W-2 you receive from your employerto a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.that are billed separately and paid in connection has a box used to indicate whether you werewith your traditional IRA are not deductible asSpousal IRA. In the case of a married covered for the year. The “Retirement plan” boxIRA contributions. However, they may be de- couple with unequal compensation who file ashould be checked if you were covered.
Reservists and volunteer firefighters should
Table 17-2.Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT also see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-
ered, later.Covered by Retirement Plan at Work
If you are not certain whether you were cov-If you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determineered by your employer’s retirement plan, you
if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction. should ask your employer.
Federal judges.For purposes of the IRA de-
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... duction, federal judges are covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan.single, any amount a full deduction.
head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) For Which Year(s) Are You
Covered?married filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
separately with a spouse who is
Special rules apply to determine the tax yearsnot covered by a plan at work
for which you are covered by an employer plan.
$150,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a These rules differ depending on whether the
plan is a defined contribution plan or a definedspouse who is covered by a plan more than $150,000 a partial deduction. benefit plan.at work but less than $160,000
Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account-
$160,000 or more no deduction. ing period you use to keep records and report
income and expenses on your income tax re-less than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a turn. For almost all people, the tax year is thespouse who is covered by a plan calendar year.$10,000 or more no deduction.at work2
Defined contribution plan.Generally, you
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). are covered by a defined contribution plan for a2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year.tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated
Page 114 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 117 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to your account for the plan year that ends with To determine if your deduction is subject to
1. The plan you participate in is establishedor within that tax year. phaseout, you must determine your modified
for its employees by:A defined contribution plan is a plan that adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
provides for a separate account for each person tus. See Filing status and Modified adjusteda. The United States,covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu- gross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-1
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo- or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.b. A state or political subdivision of a
nus plans, and money purchase pension plans. state, or
Social security recipients.Instead of usingDefined benefit plan.If you are eligible to c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)Table 17-1 or 17-2, use the worksheets in Ap-participate in your employer’s defined benefit above. pendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, all ofplan for the plan year that ends within your tax the following apply.year, you are covered by the plan. This rule2. You did not serve more than 90 days on
• You received social security benefits.applies even if you: active duty during the year (not counting
duty for training). • You received taxable compensation.• Declined to participate in the plan,
• Contributions were made to your tradi-• Did not make a required contribution, or
tional IRA.Volunteer firefighters.If the only reason you• Did not perform the minimum service re-participate in a plan is because you are a volun-• You or your spouse was covered by anquired to accrue a benefit for the year.teer firefighter, you may not be covered by theemployer retirement plan.plan. You are not covered by the plan if both ofA defined benefit plan is any plan that is not a Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-the following conditions are met.defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plans tion, your nondeductible contribution, and theinclude pension plans and annuity plans. taxable portion, if any, of your social security1. The plan you participate in is established
benefits.for its employees by:No vested interest.If you accrue a benefit for
a plan year, you are covered by that plan even ifa. The United States, Deduction phaseout. If you were covered byyou have no vested interest in (legal right to) the
an employer retirement plan and you did notaccrual. b. A state or political subdivision of areceive any social security retirement benefits,state, or your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi-
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)nated depending on your filing status and modi-Situations in Which You Are Not above. fied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.Covered
For 2006, if you are covered by a2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-Unless you are covered under another employer retirement plan at work, your IRA de-ginning of the year will not provide moreplan, you are not covered by an employer plan if duction will not be reduced (phased
TIP
than $1,800 per year at retirement.you are in one of the situations described below. out) unless your modified AGI is:
• More than $50,000 but less than $60,000Social security or railroad retirement.Cov-
for a single individual (or head of house-erage under social security or railroad retire-
Limit If Covered by Employer Plan hold),ment is not coverage under an employer
retirement plan. • More than $75,000 but less than $85,000If either you or your spouse was covered by anfor a married couple filing a joint returnBenefits from a previous employer’s plan.employer retirement plan, you may be entitled to(or a qualifying widow(er)), orIf you receive retirement benefits from a previ-only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-• Less than $10,000 for a married individ-ous employer’s plan, you are not covered by thattion at all, depending on your income and yourual filing a separate return.plan. filing status.
If your spouse is covered.If you are notYour deduction begins to decrease (phaseReservists. If the only reason you participate covered by an employer retirement plan, butout) when your income rises above a certainin a plan is because you are a member of a your spouse is, and you did not receive anyamount and is eliminated altogether when itreserve unit of the armed forces, you may not be social security benefits, your IRA deduction mayreaches a higher amount. These amounts varycovered by the plan. You are not covered by the be reduced or eliminated entirely depending ondepending on your filing status.plan if both of the following conditions are met. your filing status and modified AGI as shown in
Table 17-2.Worksheet 17-1.Figuring Your Modified AGI
Filing status.Your filing status depends pri-Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income formarily on your marital status. For this purpose,traditional IRA purposes. you need to know if your filing status is single or
head of household, married filing jointly or quali-
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) shown on line 22, Form fying widow(er), or married filing separately. If
1040A, or line 38, Form 1040 figured without taking into account you need more information on filing status, see
line 17, Form 1040A, or line 32, Form 1040................. 1. chapter 2.
Lived apart from spouse.If you did not live2. Enter any Student loan interest deduction from line 18, Form
with your spouse at any time during the year and1040A, or line 33, Form 1040.......................... 2.
you file a separate return, your filing status, for
3. Enter any Tuition and fees deduction from line 19, Form 1040A, this purpose, is single.
or line 34, Form 1040................................ 3.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).How4. Enter any domestic production activity deduction from line 35, Form you figure your modified AGI depends on1040 ........................................... 4. whether you are filing Form 1040 or Form
1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for5. Enter any Foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from
2005 and received a distribution from your IRAline 18, Form 2555-EZ, or line 43, Form 2555............... 5.
in 2005, see Publication 590.
6. Enter any Foreign housing deduction from line 48, Form 2555.... 6. Do not assume that your modified AGI
7. Enter any Excluded qualified savings bond interest shown on is the same as your compensation.
line 3, Schedule 1, Form 1040A, or line 3, Schedule B, Your modified AGI may include in-CAUTION
!
come in addition to your compensation (dis-Form 1040 (from line 14, Form 8815)..................... 7.
cussed earlier), such as interest, dividends, and8. Enter any Exclusion of employer-provided adoption benefits shown income from IRA distributions.on line 30, Form 8839............................... 8.
Form 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure
9. Add lines 1 through 8. This is your Modified AGI for traditional the amount on the page 1 “adjusted gross in-
IRA purposes..................................... 9. come” line without taking into account any of the
following amounts.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 115

Page 118 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
it applies, the spousal IRA limit. The difference c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section• IRA deduction. between your total permitted contributions and 403(b) plan), or
• Student loan interest deduction. your IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductibled. Deferred compensation plan of a statecontribution.• Tuition and fees deduction. or local government (section 457 plan).
• Domestic production activities deduction.Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary rather2005, he was covered by a retirement plan at• Foreign earned income exclusion. than treating the IRA as your own.work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGI
• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.was $65,000. Mike made a $4,000 IRA contribu-Treating it as your own.You will be con-tion for 2005. Because he was covered by a• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as yourretirement plan and his modified AGI was overest shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In- own if:$60,000, he cannot deduct his $4,000 IRA con-terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savingstribution. He must designate this contribution as• Contributions (including rollover contribu-Bonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers Witha nondeductible contribution by reporting it ontions) are made to the inherited IRA, orQualified Higher Education Expenses).Form 8606, as explained next. • You do not take the required minimum dis-• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption tribution for a year as a beneficiary of thebenefits shown on Form 8839, QualifiedForm 8606. To designate contributions as IRA.Adoption Expenses. nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.
You do not have to designate a contributionYou will only be considered to have chosen toThis is your modified AGI. as nondeductible until you file your tax return.treat the IRA as your own if:
Form 1040A. If you file Form 1040A, When you file, you can even designate other-• You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA,refigure the amount on the page 1 “adjustedwise deductible contributions as nondeductible.andgross income” line without taking into accountYou must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
any of the following amounts. ductible contributions even if you do not have to• You have an unlimited right to withdraw
file a tax return for the year. amounts from it.• IRA deduction.
Failure to report nondeductible contribu-However, if you receive a distribution from• Student loan interest deduction. tions. If you do not report nondeductible con-your deceased spouse’s IRA, you can roll thattributions, all of the contributions to your• Tuition and fees deduction. distribution over into your own IRA within thetraditional IRA will be treated as deductible. All• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- 60-day time limit, as long as the distribution isdistributions from your IRA will be taxed unlessest shown on Form 8815. not a required distribution, even if you are notyou can show, with satisfactory evidence, thatthe sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse’snondeductible contributions were made.• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption IRA.benefits shown on Form 8839. Penalty for overstatement.If you over-
state the amount of nondeductible contributionsThis is your modified AGI. Inherited from someone other than spouse.
on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you mustIf you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone otherBoth contributions for 2005 and distribu-pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,than your deceased spouse, you cannot treattions in 2005.If all three of the following apply,unless it was due to reasonable cause. the inherited IRA as your own. This means thatany IRA distributions you received in 2005 may you cannot make any contributions to the IRA. ItPenalty for failure to file Form 8606.Yoube partly tax free and partly taxable. also means you cannot roll over any amountswill have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file ainto or out of the inherited IRA. However, you• You received distributions in 2005 fromrequired Form 8606, unless you can prove thatcan make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as longone or more traditional IRAs. the failure was due to reasonable cause. as the IRA into which amounts are being moved• You made contributions to a traditional is set up and maintained in the name of theTax on earnings on nondeductibleIRA for 2005. deceased IRA owner for the benefit of you ascontributions.As long as contributions are
beneficiary.• Some of those contributions may be non-within the contribution limits, none of the earn-
deductible contributions. For more information, see the discussion ofings or gains on contributions (deductible or
inherited IRAs under Rollover From One IRAnondeductible) will be taxed until they are dis-If this is your situation, you must figure the tax- Into Another, later.tributed. See When Can You Withdraw or Useable part of the traditional IRA distribution beforeIRA Assets, later.you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you
can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxable Can You Move RetirementCost basis. You will have a cost basis in yourPart of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590. Plan Assets?traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible
If at least one of the above does not apply,contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the
You can transfer, tax free, assets (money orfigure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus
property) from other retirement plans (includingin this chapter. any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct-
traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You canible contributions.
make the following kinds of transfers.How to figure your reduced IRA deduction.
You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for • Transfers from one trustee to another.Inherited IRAseither Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using the
• Rollovers.worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called aAlso, the instructions for Form 1040 and Formbeneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or• Transfers incident to a divorce.1040A include similar worksheets that you mayentity the owner chooses to receive the benefitsbe able to use instead. of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of aTransfers to Roth IRAs.Under certain condi-traditional IRA must include in their gross in-tions, you can move assets from a traditionalcome any taxable distributions they receive.IRA to a Roth IRA. See Can You Move AmountsReporting Deductible
Into a Roth IRA under Roth IRAs, later.Contributions Inherited from spouse.If you inherit a tradi-
tional IRA from your spouse, you generally haveIf you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deductionthe following three choices.on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A, Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot1. Treat it as your own IRA by designatingA transfer of funds in your traditional IRA fromdeduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ. yourself as the account owner. one trustee directly to another, either at your
2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over intorequest or at the trustee’s request, is not a rollo-Nondeductible your traditional IRA, or to the extent it isver. Because there is no distribution to you, the
taxable, into a: transfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, itContributions
is not affected by the 1-year waiting period re-a. Qualified employer plan,Although your deduction for IRA contributions quired between rollovers, discussed later under
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-Rollover From One IRA Into Another. For infor-
be made to your IRA up to the general limit or, if tion 403(a) plan), mation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire-
Page 116 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 119 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment plans other than IRAs, see PublicationWaiting period between rollovers.Gener- Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enter
590. ally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part of zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A,
a distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot, line 11b. If the total distribution was not rolled
within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover over, enter the taxable portion of the part that
of any later distribution from that same IRA. You was not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, or
Rollovers
also cannot make a tax-free rollover of any Form 1040A, line 11b. Put “Rollover” next to
Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution toamount distributed, within the same 1-year pe- Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b.
you of cash or other assets from one retirementriod, from the IRA into which you made the See the forms instructions.
plan that you contribute (roll over) to anothertax-free rollover. If you rolled over the distribution in 2006 or
retirement plan. The contribution to the secondThe 1-year period begins on the date you from an IRA into a qualified plan (other than an
retirement plan is called a “rollover contribution.”receive the IRA distribution, not on the date you IRA), attach a statement explaining what you
roll it over into an IRA. did.
Note. An amount rolled over tax free from
one retirement plan to another is generally in-Example. You have two traditional IRAs,
cludible in income when it is distributed from theIRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover ofRollover From Employer’s Plan
second plan. a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditionalInto an IRA
IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of theKinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA.You distribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rollover You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or partcan roll over amounts from the following plansof any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into of an eligible rollover distribution you receiveinto a traditional IRA: another traditional IRA. from your (or your deceased spouse’s):
• A traditional IRA, However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3• Employer’s qualified pension, profit-shar-does not prevent you from making a tax-free• An employer’s qualified retirement plan for ing or stock bonus plan,rollover from IRA-2 into any other traditionalits employees, • Annuity plan,IRA. This is because you have not, within the
• A deferred compensation plan of a state orlast year, rolled over, tax free, any distribution• Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)local government (section 457 plan), orfrom IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover into plan), orIRA-2.• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section • Governmental deferred compensation403(b) plan). Exception. There is an exception to the ruleplan (section 457 plan).that amounts rolled over tax free into an IRA
cannot be rolled over tax free again within theTreatment of rollovers.You cannot deduct a A qualified plan is one that meets the require-1-year period beginning on the date of the origi-rollover contribution, but you must report the ments of the Internal Revenue Code.nal distribution. The exception applies to a distri-rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-bution which meets all three of the followingEligible rollover distribution.Generally, ancussed later under Reporting rollovers fromrequirements. eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofIRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em- all or part of the balance to your credit in aployer plans. 1. It is made from a failed financial institutionqualified retirement plan except the following.by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA.
tion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution.1. A required minimum distribution (explainedYou may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-
later under When Must You Withdraw IRAtion from your traditional IRA into a qualified2. It was not initiated by either the custodialAssets? (Required Minimum Distributions).plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-institution or the depositor.ings Fund (for federal employees), deferred 2. Hardship distributions.3. It was made because:compensation plans of state or local govern-
3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-ments (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltereda. The custodial institution is insolvent,odic distributions paid at least once a yearannuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part ofand over:the distribution that you can roll over is the part
that would otherwise be taxable (includible inb. The receiver is unable to find a buyera. Your lifetime or life expectancy,your income). Qualified plans may, but are not for the institution.
required to, accept such rollovers. b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of you
and your beneficiary, orPartial rollovers.If you withdraw assets fromTime limit for making a rollover contribution.
a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of theYou generally must make the rollover contribu- c. A period of 10 years or more.
withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. Thetion by the 60th day after the day you receive the
amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu-distribution from your traditional IRA or your
cept for the part that is a return of nondeductibletions or excess deferrals, and any incomeemployer’s plan.
contributions). The amount you keep may be allocable to the excess, or of excess an- The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement
subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-nual additions and any allocable gains.where the failure to do so would be against
butions, discussed later under What Acts Resultequity or good conscience, such as in the event 5. A loan treated as a distribution because itin Penalties or Additional Taxes.of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond does not satisfy certain requirements ei-your reasonable control. For more information, ther when made or later (such as uponRequired distributions.Amounts that mustsee Publication 590. default), unless the participant’s accruedbe distributed during a particular year under the
benefits are reduced (offset) to repay theExtension of rollover period.If an amount required distribution rules (discussed later) are
loan.distributed to you from a traditional IRA or anot eligible for rollover treatment.
qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen 6. Dividends on employer securities.Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional IRAdeposit at any time during the 60-day periodfrom your spouse, you generally can roll it over,7. The cost of life insurance coverage.allowed for a rollover, special rules extend theor you can choose to make the inherited IRArollover period. For more information, see Publi- 8. Generally, a distribution to the planyour own. See Treating it as your own, earlier.cation 590. participant’s beneficiary.Not inherited from spouse.If you inherit aMore information. For more information ontraditional IRA from someone other than yourReporting rollovers from employer plans.rollovers, see Publication 590. spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it toEnter the total distribution (before income tax orreceive a rollover contribution. You must with-other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040,draw the IRA assets within a certain period. Forline 16a or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amountRollover From One IRA Into more information, see Publication 590. should be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. FromAnother
Reporting rollovers from IRAs.Report any this amount, subtract any contributions (usually
You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the rollover from one traditional IRA to the same or shown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax-
assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b, able to you when made. From that result, sub-
them within 60 days in the same or another Form 1040 or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A. tract the amount that was rolled over either
traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you Enter the total amount of the distribution on directly or within 60 days of receiving the distri-
cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. If bution. Enter the remaining amount, even if
IRA. the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or zero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A,
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 117

Page 120 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 12b. Also, enter ‘‘Rollover’’ next to Form loss, the net income you must transfer on the contribution may be a negative
1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. may be a negative amount. amount.
• Report the recharacterization on your tax
return for the year during which the contri-Note. To calculate the amount you mustTransfers Incident to Divorce bution was made. withdraw, see Publication 590.
If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred• Treat the contribution as having been Earnings includible in income.You mustfrom your spouse or former spouse to you by amade to the second IRA on the date that itinclude in income any earnings on the contribu-divorce or separate maintenance decree or a was actually made to the first IRA. tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-written document related to such a decree, the come for the year in which you made theinterest in the IRA, starting from the date of theNo deduction allowed. You cannot deduct contributions, not in the year in which you with-transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer isthe contribution to the first IRA. Any net income draw them.tax free. For detailed information, see Publica-you transfer with the recharacterized contribu-tion 590. Generally, except for any part of ation is treated as earned in the second IRA. withdrawal that is a return of nonde-
Required notifications.To recharacterize ductible contributions (basis), anyCAUTION
!
Converting From Any Traditional a contribution, you must notify both the trustee ofwithdrawal of your contributions after the due
the first IRA (the one to which the contributiondate (or extended due date) of your return will beIRA to a Roth IRA
was actually made) and the trustee of the sec-treated as a taxable distribution. Excess contri-
You can convert amounts from a traditional IRAond IRA (the one to which the contribution isbutions can also be recovered tax free as dis-
into a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make thebeing moved) that you have elected to treat thecussed under What Acts Result in Penalties or
withdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of thecontribution as having been made to the second Additional Taxes, later.
following requirements are met. IRA rather than the first. You must make the
Early distributions tax.The 10% additionalnotifications by the date of the transfer. Only one• Your modified AGI (explained later under tax on distributions made before you reach agenotification is required if both IRAs are main-Roth IRAs) is not more than $100,000. 591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw-tained by the same trustee. The notification(s)
als of your contributions. However, the distribu-• You are not a married individual filing amust include all of the following information.
tion of interest or other income must be reportedseparate return.
• The type and amount of the contribution toon Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali-
the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.fies as an exception to the age 591/2 rule, it will
Note. If you did not live with your spouse at be subject to this tax.• The date on which the contribution wasany time during the year and you file a separatemade to the first IRA and the year forreturn, your filing status, for this purpose, iswhich it was made. When Must You Withdrawsingle.
• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA toIRA Assets? (Required
transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer theRequired distributions.You cannot convert Minimum Distributions)amount of the contribution and any netamounts that must be distributed from your
income (or loss) allocable to the contribu-traditional IRA for a particular year (including the You cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef-tion to the trustee of the second IRA.calendar year in which you reach age 701/2) initely. Eventually they must be distributed. Ifunder the required distribution rules (discussed• The name of the trustee of the first IRAthere are no distributions, or if the distributionslater). and the name of the trustee of the secondare not large enough, you may have to pay a
IRA. 50% excise tax on the amount not distributed asInherited IRAs.If you inherited a traditional required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi-• Any additional information needed toIRA from someone other than your spouse, you cient Distributions), later. The requirements formake the transfer.cannot convert it to a Roth IRA. distributing IRA funds differ depending on
whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi-Income. You must include in your gross in-Reporting a recharacterization.If you electciary of a decedent’s IRA.come distributions from a traditional IRA thatto recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as ayou would have had to include in income if you Required minimum distribution. Thecontribution to another IRA, you must report thehad not converted them into a Roth IRA. You do amount that must be distributed each year isrecharacterization on your tax return as directednot include in gross income any part of a distri- referred to as the required minimum distribution.by Form 8606 and its instructions. You mustbution from a traditional IRA that is a return oftreat the contribution as having been made toyour basis, as discussed later. Required distributions not eligible for rollo-the second IRA.If you must include any amount in your gross ver. Amounts that must be distributed (re-
income, you may have to increase your with- quired minimum distributions) during a particular
When Can You Withdrawholding or make estimated tax payments. See year are not eligible for rollover treatment.
chapter 4. or Use IRA Assets? IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi-
tional IRA, you must start receiving distributionsThere are rules limiting use of your IRA assets
from your IRA by April 1 of the year following theRecharacterizations and distributions from it. Violation of the rules
year in which you reach age 701/2. April 1 of thegenerally results in additional taxes in the year ofYou may be able to treat a contribution made to year following the year in which you reach ageviolation. See What Acts Result in Penalties orone type of IRA as having been made to a 701/2 is referred to as the required beginningAdditional Taxes, later.different type of IRA. This is called recharacter- date.
izing the contribution. More detailed informationContributions returned before the due dateDistributions by the required beginning date.is in Publication 590. of return.If you made IRA contributions inYou must receive at least a minimum amount for2005, you can withdraw them tax free by the dueHow to recharacterize a contribution.To each year starting with the year you reach agedate of your return. If you have an extension ofrecharacterize a contribution, you generally 701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not)time to file your return, you can withdraw themmust have the contribution transferred from the receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year,tax free by the extended due date. You can dofirst IRA (the one to which it was made) to the then you must receive distributions for your 701/2this if, for each contribution you withdraw, bothsecond IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If the year by April 1 of the next year.of the following conditions apply.transfer is made by the due date (including ex- If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2,
tensions) for your tax return for the year during• You did not take a deduction for the contri- but before April 1 of the next year, no minimum
which the contribution was made, you can electbution. distribution is required because death occurred
to treat the contribution as having been originally before the required beginning date.• You withdraw any interest or other incomemade to the second IRA instead of to the firstearned on the contribution. You can take Even if you begin receiving distribu-IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, youinto account any loss on the contribution tions before you attain age 701/2, youmust do all three of the following. while it was in the IRA when calculating must begin calculating and receivingCAUTION
!
• Include in the transfer any net income allo- the amount that must be withdrawn. Ifrequired minimum distributions by your required
cable to the contribution. If there was a there was a loss, the net income earnedbeginning date.
Page 118 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 121 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Distributions after the required beginningdistributed, each distribution is partly nontaxable lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal
date. The required minimum distribution for and partly taxable. descendent).
any year after the year you turn 701/2 must be The following are examples of prohibitedForm 8606. You must complete Form 8606made by December 31 of that later year. transactions with a traditional IRA.and attach it to your return if you receive a
• Borrowing money from it.distribution from a traditional IRA and have everBeneficiaries.If you are the beneficiary of a
made nondeductible contributions to any of yourdecedent’s traditional IRA, the requirements for • Selling property to it.traditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figuredistributions from that IRA generally depend on
• Receiving unreasonable compensation forthe nontaxable distributions for 2005 and yourwhether the IRA owner died before or after the
managing it.total IRA basis for 2005 and earlier years.required beginning date for distributions.
• Using it as security for a loan.More information. For more information, in-Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,
cluding how to figure your minimum required • Buying property for personal use (presentbut you are not required to file an income tax
distribution each year and how to figure your or future) with IRA funds.return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to
required distribution if you are a beneficiary of athe IRS at the time and place you would other-
decedent’s IRA, see Publication 590. wise file an income tax return. Effect on an IRA account.Generally, if you or
your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-Distributions reported on Form 1099-R.IfAre Distributions Taxable? action in connection with your traditional IRAyou receive a distribution from your traditionalaccount at any time during the year, the accountIRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, DistributionsIn general, distributions from a traditional IRA stops being an IRA as of the first day of thatFrom Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orare taxable in the year you receive them. year.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu-Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from Effect on you or your beneficiary.If yourtions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Formtraditional IRAs being taxable in the year you account stops being an IRA because you or your1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tellsreceive them are: beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction,you what type of distribution you received fromthe account is treated as distributing all its as-• Rollovers, your IRA. sets to you at their fair market values on the first• Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis- day of the year. If the total of those values isWithholding. Federal income tax is withheldcussed earlier, and more than your basis in the IRA, you will have afrom distributions from traditional IRAs unless
taxable gain that is includible in your income. For• The return of nondeductible contributions, you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-
information on figuring your gain and reporting itdiscussed later under Distributions Fully orter 4.
in income, see Are Distributions Taxable, ear-Partly Taxable. IRA distributions delivered outside thelier. The distribution may be subject to additionalUnited States.In general, if you are a U.S.taxes or penalties.citizen or resident alien and your home addressAlthough a conversion of a traditional
is outside the United States or its possessions,IRA is considered a rollover for Roth Taxes on prohibited transactions.If some-
you cannot choose exemption from withholdingIRA purposes, it is not an exception to one other than the owner or beneficiary of aCAUTION
!
on distributions from your traditional IRA.the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac-
are taxable in the year you receive them. Con- tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes.Reporting taxable distributions on your re-version distributions are includible in your gross In general, there is a 15% tax on the amount ofturn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-income subject to this rule and the special rules the prohibited transaction and a 100% additionaling early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, orfor conversions explained in Publication 590. tax if the transaction is not corrected.Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required on
Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). IfOrdinary income. Distributions from tradi- More information. For more information ononly part of the distribution is taxable, enter thetional IRAs that you include in income are taxed prohibited transactions, see Publication 590.total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or Formas ordinary income.
1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on Form
No special treatment.In figuring your tax,1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. YouInvestment in Collectiblesyou cannot use the 10-year tax option or capitalcannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ.
gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu- If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, thetions from qualified employer plans. amount invested is considered distributed to youWhat Acts Result in in the year invested. You may have to pay the
Penalties or Additional 10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-Distributions Fully or Partly cussed later.Taxes?Taxable
Collectibles.These include:The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs forDistributions from your traditional IRA may beretirement savings can be offset by additional• Art works,fully or partly taxable, depending on whethertaxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules.your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu- • Rugs,There are additions to the regular tax fortions. using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions.• Antiques,
There are also additional taxes for the followingFully taxable.If only deductible contributions • Metals,activities.were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if
• Gems,you have more than one), you have no basis in• Investing in collectibles.your IRA. Because you have no basis in your • Stamps,• Making excess contributions.IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when
• Coins,received. See Reporting taxable distributions on• Taking early distributions.your return, later. • Alcoholic beverages, and• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate
Partly taxable.If you made nondeductible (failing to take required distributions).• Certain other tangible personal property.
contributions to any of your traditional IRAs, you
have a cost basis (investment in the contract)There are penalties for overstating the Exception. Your IRA can invest in one,
equal to the amount of those contributions.amount of nondeductible contributions and for one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.
These nondeductible contributions are not taxedfailure to file a Form 8606, if required. gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted by
when they are distributed to you. They are a the Treasury Department. It can also invest in
return of your investment in your IRA. certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,
Only the part of the distribution that repre- palladium, and platinum bullion.Prohibited Transactions
sents nondeductible contributions (your cost ba-
sis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributions Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-
have been made, distributions consist partly of proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your
Excess Contributions
nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly of beneficiary, or any disqualified person.
deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (if Disqualified persons include your fiduciary Generally, an excess contribution is the amount
there are any). Until all of your basis has been and members of your family (spouse, ancestor, contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 119

Page 122 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that is more than the smaller of the following ual Income Tax Return, for that year and do notwithdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) This
amounts. deduct the excess contribution on the amended also applies to transfers incident to divorce, as
return. Generally, you can file an amended re- discussed earlier.• The maximum deductible amount for theturn within 3 years after you filed your return, oryear. For 2005, this is $4,000 ($4,500 if Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on2 years from the time the tax was paid, which-you are 50 or older). early distributions is 10% of the amount of theever is later. early distribution that you must include in your• Your taxable compensation for the year. gross income. This tax is in addition to anyExcess due to incorrect rollover information.
regular income tax resulting from including theIf an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is
Tax on excess contributions.In general, if distribution in income.the result of a rollover and the excess occurred
the excess contributions for a year are not with-because the information the plan was requiredNondeductible contributions.The tax ondrawn by the date your return for the year is dueto give you was incorrect, you can withdraw theearly distributions does not apply to the part of a(including extensions), you are subject to a 6%excess contribution. The limits mentioned abovedistribution that represents a return of your non-tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year onare increased by the amount of the excess thatdeductible contributions (basis).excess amounts that remain in your traditionalis due to the incorrect information. You will have
IRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannotto amend your return for the year in which theMore information. For more information on
be more than 6% of the value of your IRA as ofexcess occurred to correct the reporting of the early distributions, see Publication 590.
the end of your tax year. rollover amounts in that year. Do not include in
your gross income the part of the excess contri-Excess contributions withdrawn by due datebution caused by the incorrect information.Excess Accumulationsof return.You will not have to pay the 6% tax if (Insufficient Distributions)you withdraw an excess contribution made dur-
ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest or You cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRAEarly Distributionsother income earned on the excess contribution. indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receivingYou must complete your withdrawal by the dateYou must include early distributions of taxabledistributions by April 1 of the year following theyour tax return for that year is due, includingamounts from your traditional IRA in your grossyear in which you reach age 701/2. The requiredextensions. income. Early distributions are also subject to anminimum distribution for any year after the year
additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Formin which you reach age 701/2 must be made byHow to treat withdrawn contributions.Do 5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, toDecember 31 of that later year.not include in your gross income an excessfigure and report the tax.contribution that you withdraw from your tradi- Tax on excess. If distributions are less thantional IRA before your tax return is due if bothEarly distributions defined.Early distribu-the required minimum distribution for the year,the following conditions are met. tions generally are amounts distributed fromyou may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that
your traditional IRA account or annuity beforeyear on the amount not distributed as required.• No deduction was allowed for the excess
you are age 591/2.contribution. Request to excuse the tax.If the excess ac-
Age 591/2 rule.Generally, if you are under agecumulation is due to reasonable error, and you• You withdraw the interest or other income
591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on thehave taken, or are taking, steps to remedy theearned on the excess contribution.
distribution of any assets (money or other prop-insufficient distribution, you can request that theYou can take into account any loss on the contri-erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributionstax be excused.bution while it was in the IRA when calculatingbefore you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-If you believe you qualify for this relief, do thethe amount that must be withdrawn. If there wastions. following.a loss, the net income you must withdraw mayThe 10% additional tax applies to the part of• File Form 5329 with your Form 1040.be a negative amount. the distribution that you have to include in gross
• Pay any tax you owe on excess accumula-income. It is in addition to any regular income taxHow to treat withdrawn interest or other
tions.on that amount.income. You must include in your gross in-
come the interest or other income that was • Attach a letter of explanation.Exceptions. There are several exceptionsearned on the excess contribution. Report it onto the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive ayour return for the year in which the excess If the IRS approves your request, it will refunddistribution before you are age 591/2, you maycontribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter- the excess accumulations tax you paid.not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you areest or other income may be subject to an addi-in one of the following situations. Exemption from tax.If you are unable to taketional 10% tax on early distributions, discussed
• You have unreimbursed medical expensesrequired distributions because you have a tradi-later.
that are more than 7.5% of your adjustedtional IRA invested in a contract issued by an
Excess contributions withdrawn after due gross income. insurance company that is in state insurer delin-
date of return.In general, you must include all quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax does• The distributions are not more than thedistributions (withdrawals) from your traditional not apply if the conditions and requirements ofcost of your medical insurance.IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow- Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.
ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess• You are disabled. More information. For more information oncontributions from your IRA and not include the• You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRAexcess accumulations, see Publication 590.amount withdrawn in your gross income. owner.
• Total contributions (other than rollover• You are receiving distributions in the formcontributions) for 2005 to your IRA were Reporting Additional Taxesof an annuity.not more than $4,000 ($4,500 if you are
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report the50 or older). • The distributions are not more than your
tax on excess contributions, early distributions,qualified higher education expenses.• You did not take a deduction for the ex- and excess accumulations. If you must file Formcess contribution being withdrawn. • You use the distributions to buy, build, or5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Formrebuild a first home. 1040EZ.The withdrawal can take place at any time, even
after the due date, including extensions, for filing• The distribution is due to an IRS levy ofFiling a tax return.If you must file an individ-your tax return for the year. the qualified plan. ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and
attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the totalMost of these exceptions are explained in Publi-Excess contribution deducted in an earlier amount of additional taxes due on Form 1040,cation 590.year. If you deducted an excess contribution in line 60.an earlier year for which the total contributions
were not more than the maximum deductible Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-Not filing a tax return.If you do not have to
amount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlier erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not file a tax return but do have to pay one of the
years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 for subject to either regular income tax or the 10% additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-
2002 through 2004 if you were 50 or older)), you additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and
can still remove the excess from your traditional contributions after the due date of your return place you would have filed your Form 1040. Be
IRA and not include it in your gross income. To are also tax free and therefore not subject to the sure to include your address on page 1 and your
do this, file Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individ- 10% additional tax. (See Excess contributionssignature and date on page 2. Enclose, but do
Page 120 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 123 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not attach, a check or money order payable to• $10,000 for married filing separately and the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much
the United States Treasury for the tax you owe, you lived with your spouse at any timeCan Be Contributed under Traditional IRAs),
as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se- during the year, or you file jointly, and your modified AGI is less
curity number and “2005 Form 5329” on your than $160,000.
• $110,000 for single, head of household, orcheck or money order. married filing separately and you did notCompensation. Compensation includeslive with your spouse at any time duringForm 5329 not required.You do not have to wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-the year.use Form 5329 if either of the following situa- nuses, and other amounts received for providingtions exist. personal services. It also includes commissions,
You may be eligible to claim a creditself-employment income, and taxable alimony• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is for contributions to your Roth IRA. Forand separate maintenance payments.correctly shown in box 7 of all Forms more information, see chapter 37.
TIP
1099-R. If you do not owe any other addi-
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRAtional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax-
purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI)able part of the early distribution by 10%Is there an age limit for contributions?Con- as shown on your return modified as follows.and enter the result on Form 1040, line 60.tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-Put “No” to the left of line 60 to indicateless of your age. 1. Subtract the following:that you do not have to file Form 5329.
However, if you owe this tax and also oweCan you contribute to a Roth IRA for your a. Conversion income. This is any incomeany other additional tax on a distribution,spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for resulting from the conversion of an IRAdo not enter this 10% additional tax di-your spouse provided the contributions satisfy (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA.rectly on your Form 1040. You must file
Form 5329 to report your additional taxes. 
Worksheet 17-2.Modified Adjusted Gross Income for Roth IRA• If you rolled over part or all of a distribution Purposesfrom a qualified retirement plan, the part
rolled over is not subject to the tax on Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth
early distributions. IRA purposes.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38, or
Form 1040A, line 22).............................. 1.
Roth IRAs 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA
(other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA or a minimum requiredRegardless of your age, you may be able to distribution from an IRA (if figuring MAGI for conversionestablish and make nondeductible contributionspurposes)...................................... 2.to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1........................... 3.
Contributions not reported.You do not re-
4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction (Form 1040, line 32, orport Roth IRA contributions on your return.
Form 1040A, line 17).............................. 4.
What Is a Roth IRA? 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction (Form 1040,
line 33, or Form 1040A, line 18)....................... 5.
A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,
6. Enter any tuition and fees deduction (Form 1040, line 34, orexcept as explained in this chapter, is subject to
Form 1040A, line 19).............................. 6.the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined
earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-7. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusionity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities(Form 2555, line 43, or Form 2555-EZ, line 18)............. 7.are described in Publication 590.
To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity8. Enter any foreign housing deduction (Form 2555, line 48)...... 8.
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is set
9. Enter any exclusion of bond interest (Form 8815, line 14)...... 9.up. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but
neither a SEP-IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be 10. Enter any exclusion of employer-provided adoption benefitsdesignated as a Roth IRA. (Form 8839, line 30)............................... 10.Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy11. Enter any domestic production activities deduction (Form 1040,
the requirements, qualified distributions (dis-line 35 or Form 1040NR, line 33)...................... 11.
cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be12. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 11.................. 12.made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2
and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as13. Enter:long as you live. • $160,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)
• $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your
spouse at any time during the yearWhen Can a Roth IRA Be
• $110,000 for all others 13.Set Up?
 Next. Is the amount on line 12 more than the amount on line
You can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How- 13?
ever, the time for making contributions for anyIf yes, then see the Note below.
year is limited. See When Can You Make Contri- If no, then the amount on line 12 is your modified AGI for Roth
butions, later under Can You Contribute to a IRA purposes.Roth IRA?
Note. If the amount on line 12 is more than the amount on line 13 and you have other
income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that areCan You Contribute to a subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of
Roth IRA? figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. When figuring your modified AGI for
conversion purposes, or minimum required distributions from IRAs, refigure your AGI
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA ifwithout taking into account any income from conversions. (If you receive social security
you have taxable compensation (defined later) benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) Then go
and your modified AGI (defined later) is less to list item (2) under Modified AGI or line 4 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure your
than: modified AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based
phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 12.
• $160,000 for married filing jointly or quali-
fying widow(er),
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 121

Page 124 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Minimum required distributions fromTable 17-3.Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
qualified retirement plans (including
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by theIRAs) (for conversions only).
amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).
2. Add the following deductions and exclu-
sions: IF you have taxable
compensation and your AND your modifieda. Traditional IRA deduction, filing status is... AGI is... THEN...
b. Student loan interest deduction,
less than $150,000 you can contribute up to $4,000married filing jointly, orc. Tuition and fees deduction, ($4,500 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)
2005). For 2006, this amount isd. Foreign earned income exclusion,
$4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or oldere. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction, in 2006).
f. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-
at least $150,000 the amount you can contribute isterest shown on Form 8815, and
but less than $160,000 reduced as explained underg. Exclusion of employer-provided adop- Contribution limit reduced intion benefits shown on Form 8839. Publication 590.
h. Domestic production activities deduc- $160,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.tion from Form 1040, line 35, or Form
1040NR, line 33. zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $4,000married filing separately
($4,500 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with yourYou can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure your 2005). For 2006, this amount isspouse at any time duringmodified AGI. $4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or olderthe year
in 2006).
more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isHow Much Can Be Contributed?
but less than $10,000 reduced as explained under
The contribution limit for Roth IRAs depends on Contribution limit reduced in
whether contributions are made only to Roth Publication 590.IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and Roth IRAs.
$10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made less than $95,000 you can contribute up to $4,000single,only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener- ($4,500 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, orally is the lesser of the following amounts. 2005). For 2006, this amount ismarried filing separately
$4,000 ($5,000 if you are 50 or olderand you did not live with• $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in in 2006).your spouse at any time2005). For 2006, the amount is $4,000
during the year(and increases to $5,000 if you are 50 or at least $95,000 the amount you can contribute isolder in 2006). but less than $110,000 reduced as explained under
Contribution limit reduced in• Your taxable compensation.
Publication 590.However, if your modified AGI is above a certain
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, $110,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
as explained later under Contribution limit re-
duced.
Figuring the reduction.If the amount you or properly converted from a traditionalRoth IRAs and traditional IRAs.If contribu- IRA, as described later) that are more thancan contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, seetions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional your contribution limit for the year, plusPublication 590 for how to figure the reduction.IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu-
2. Any excess contributions for the precedingtion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as
year, reduced by the total of:your limit would be if contributions were made
When Can You Makeonly to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri- a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAsContributions?butions (other than employer contributions for the year, plusunder a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to
You can make contributions to a Roth IRA for aall IRAs other than Roth IRAs. b. Your contribution limit for the year mi-year at any time during the year or by the due nus your contributions to all your IRAsThis means that your contribution limit is thedate of your return for that year (not includingfor the year.lesser of the following amounts.
extensions).
• $4,000 ($4,500 if you are 50 or older in You can make contributions for 2005Withdrawal of excess contributions.For2005). For 2006, $4,000 ($5,000 if you are by the due date (not including exten-purposes of determining excess contributions,50 or older in 2006) minus all contributions sions) for filing your 2005 tax return.any contribution that is withdrawn on or before
TIP
(other than employer contributions under aThis means that most people can make contri-the due date (including extensions) for filing yourSEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year tobutions for 2005 by April 17, 2006. tax return for the year is treated as an amountall IRAs other than Roth IRAs. not contributed. This treatment applies only if
• Your taxable compensation minus all con- any earnings on the contributions are also with-
tributions (other than employer contribu-What If You Contribute Too Much? drawn. The earnings are considered to have
tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) been earned and received in the year the excess
A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu-for the year to all IRAs other than Roth contribution was made.
IRAs. tion to a Roth IRA. Applying excess contributions.If contribu-
However, if your modified AGI is above a certain tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, the limit, you can apply the excess contributionExcess contributions.These are the contri-as explained later under Contribution limit re- in one year to a later year if the contributions forbutions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equalduced. that later year are less than the maximum al-the total of: lowed for that year.
Contribution limit reduced.If your modified
1. Amounts contributed for the tax year toAGI is above a certain amount, your contribution
your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop-limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 to
determine if this reduction applies to you. erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
modified AGI of less than $100,000 and a filing 2. The payment or distribution is:Can You Move Amounts status other than married filing separately, buta. Made on or after the date you reachInto a Roth IRA? your expectations did not come true, you have age 591/2,made a failed conversion.You may be able to convert amounts from either b. Made because you are disabled,a traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth
Results of failed conversions.If the con- c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estateIRA. You may be able to recharacterize contri-
after your death, orverted amount (contribution) is not recharacter-butions made to one IRA as having been made
ized (explained earlier), the contribution will bedirectly to a different IRA. You can roll amounts d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) ofover from one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.treated as a regular contribution to the Roth IRAcertain qualified first-time homebuyerand subject to the following tax consequences. amounts. See Publication 590 for more
information.• A 6% excise tax per year will apply to anyConversions
excess contribution not withdrawn from
You can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.the Roth IRA.
The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard- Additional tax on distributions of conversion• The distributions from the traditional IRAless of the conversion method used. Most of the contributions within 5-year period.If, withinmust be included in your gross income.rules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo- the 5-year period starting with the first day of
ver From One IRA Into Another under Tradi- • The 10% additional tax on early distribu-your tax year in which you convert an amount
tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However,tions may apply to any distribution. from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, you take a
the 1-year waiting period does not apply. distribution from a Roth IRA, you may have to
How to avoid. You must move the amount pay the 10% additional tax on early distributions.Conversion methods. You can convert converted (including all earnings from the dateYou generally must pay the 10% additional taxamounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in on any amount attributable to the part of theof conversion) into a traditional IRA by the dueany of the following ways. amount converted (the conversion contribution)date (including extensions) for your tax return for• Rollover. You can receive a distribution that you had to include in income. A separatethe year during which you made the conversionfrom a traditional IRA and roll it over (con- 5-year period applies to each conversion. Seeto the Roth IRA. You do not have to include thistribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days Ordering rules for distributions, later, to deter-distribution (withdrawal) in income. Seeafter the distribution. mine the amount, if any, of the distribution that isRecharacterizations, earlier, for more informa-
attributable to the part of the conversion contri-tion.• Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di- bution that you had to include in income.rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to
transfer an amount from the traditional IRA
to the trustee of the Roth IRA.
Rollover From a Roth IRA Additional tax on other early distributions.
Unless an exception applies, the taxable part of
• Same trustee transfer. If the trustee ofYou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theother distributions from your Roth IRA(s) thatthe traditional IRA also maintains the Rothassets from one Roth IRA if you contribute themare not qualified distributions is subject to theIRA, you can direct the trustee to transferwithin 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the10% additional tax on early distributions. Seean amount from the traditional IRA to therules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo- Publication 590 for more information.Roth IRA. ver From One IRA Into Another under Tradi-
tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers.Same trustee. Conversions made with the Ordering rules for distributions.If you re-same trustee can be made by redesignating the ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that isAre Distributions Taxable?traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open- not a qualified distribution, part of it may being a new account or issuing a new contract. taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-You do not include in your gross income quali-Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally, tions (including conversion contributions) andfied distributions or distributions that are a returnyou can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA earnings are considered to be distributed fromof your regular contributions from your Rothto a Roth IRA under the same rules explained your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distrib-IRA(s). You also do not include distributionsearlier under Converting From Any Traditional uted first. See Publication 590 for more informa-from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free intoIRA to a Roth IRA. tion.another Roth IRA. You may have to include part However, you cannot convert any amountof other distributions in your income. See Order-distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during theing rules for distributions, later. Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets?2-year period beginning on the date you first You are not required to take distributions fromparticipated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-by your employer. What are qualified distributions?A qualifiedbution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do notdistribution is any payment or distribution fromMore information.For more detailed informa- apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive.your Roth IRA that meets the following require-tion on conversions, see Publication 590. However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner,ments. certain of the minimum distribution rules that
apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs.1. It is made after the 5-year period beginningFailed Conversions with the first taxable year for which a con-
tribution was made to a Roth IRA set upMore information.For more detailed informa-If, when you converted amounts from a tradi-
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.for your benefit, andtional IRA into a Roth IRA, you expected to have
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 123

Page 126 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items
You may want to see: Instruments
18. Publication Executed After 1984
❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
ments under divorce or separation instrumentsAlimony executed after 1984.
Exception for instruments executed beforeGeneral Rules
1985. There are two situations where the rulesIntroduction for instruments executed after 1984 apply toThe following rules apply to alimony regardlessThis chapter discusses the rules that apply if you instruments executed before 1985.of when the divorce or separation instrumentpay or receive alimony. It covers the followingwas executed. 1. A divorce or separation instrument exe-topics:
cuted before 1985 and then modified afterPayments not alimony. Not all payments• What payments are alimony, 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rulesunder a divorce or separation instrument are
will apply.alimony. Alimony does not include any of the• What payments are not alimony, such as
following.child support, 2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-• How to deduct alimony you paid, 1. Child support. rated into, or adopted by, a final decree
• How to report alimony income you re- 2. Noncash property settlements. executed after 1984 that:
ceived, and 3. Payments that are your spouse’s part of a. Changes the amount or period of pay-community income. (See Community Prop-• Whether you must recapture the tax bene- ment, orerty in Publication 504.)fits of alimony. Recapture means adding
b. Adds or deletes any contingency orback in your income all or part of a deduc-4. Payments to keep up the payer’s property. condition.tion you took in a prior year.
5. Use of property.
For the rules for alimony payments underAlimony is a payment to or for a spouse or
pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-former spouse under a divorce or separationPayments to a third party.Cash payments
tions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504(including checks and money orders) to a thirdinstrument. It does not include voluntary pay- on the IRS website at www.irs.gov.party on behalf of your spouse under the termsments that are not made under a divorce or
of your divorce or separation instrument may beseparation instrument. Example 1. In November 1984, you andalimony if they otherwise qualify. These includeAlimony is deductible by the payer and must your former spouse executed a written separa-payments for your spouse’s medical expenses,be included in the spouse’s or former spouse’s tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofhousing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,income. Although this chapter is generally writ- divorce was substituted for the written separa-etc. The payments are treated as received byten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can tion agreement. The decree of divorce did notyour spouse and then paid to the third party.use the information to determine whether an change the terms for the alimony you pay your
amount received is alimony. Life insurance premiums.Alimony includes former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated
To be alimony, a payment must meet certainpremiums you must pay under your divorce oras executed before 1985. Alimony payments
requirements. Different requirements apply toseparation instrument for insurance on your lifeunder this decree are not subject to the rules for
to the extent your spouse owns the policy.payments under instruments executed after payments under instruments executed after
1984.1984 and to payments under instruments exe-Payments for jointly-owned home. If yourcuted before 1985. This chapter discusses thedivorce or separation instrument states that youExample 2. Assume the same facts as inrules for payments under instruments executedmust pay expenses for a home owned by youExample 1 except that the decree of divorceafter 1984. If you need the rules for paymentsand your spouse or former spouse, some of yourchanged the amount of the alimony. In this ex-under pre-1985 instruments, get and keep apayments may be alimony. ample, the decree of divorce is not treated ascopy of the 2004 version of Publication 504.
executed before 1985. The alimony paymentsMortgage payments. If you must pay all theThat was the last year the information on
are subject to the rules for payments under in-mortgage payments (principal and interest) on apre-1985 instruments was included in Publica- struments executed after 1984.jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify,tion 504.
you can deduct one-half of the total payments asUse Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide to Alimony requirements.A payment to or for aalimony. If you itemize deductions and the homedetermine whether certain payments are con- spouse under a divorce or separation instrumentis a qualified home, you can claim half of thesidered alimony. is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint returninterest in figuring your deductible interest. Your
with each other and all the following require-spouse must report one-half of the payments asDefinitions.The following definitions apply ments are met. alimony received. If your spouse itemizes de-throughout this chapter. ductions and the home is a qualified home, he or1. The payment is in cash.she can claim one-half of the interest on theSpouse or former spouse. Unless other-
mortgage in figuring deductible interest. 2. The instrument does not designate thewise stated in the following discussions about
payment as not alimony.alimony, the term “spouse” includes former Taxes and insurance. If you must pay allspouse. the real estate taxes or insurance on a home3. The spouses are not members of the same
held as tenants in common, you can deduct household at the time the payments areDivorce or separation instrument.The
one-half of these payments as alimony. Your made. This requirement applies only if theterm “divorce or separation instrument” means: 
spouse must report one-half of these paymentsspouses are legally separated under a de-
as alimony received. If you and your spouse cree of divorce or separate maintenance.1. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-
itemize deductions, you can each claim one-halfnance or a written instrument incident to 4. There is no liability to make any paymentof the real estate taxes and none of the homethat decree, (in cash or property) after the death of theinsurance. recipient spouse.2. A written separation agreement, or  If your home is held as tenants by the en-
tirety or joint tenants, none of your payments for5. The payment is not treated as child sup-3. A decree or any type of court order requir-
taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item-port. ing a spouse to make payments for the
ize deductions, you can claim all of the realsupport or maintenance of the other Each of these requirements is discussed next.estate taxes and none of the home insurance.spouse. This includes a temporary decree,
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and aOther payments to a third party.If you Payments must be in cash. Only cash pay-
decree of alimony pendente lite (while made other third-party payments, see Publica- ments, including checks and money orders,
awaiting action on the final decree ortion 504 to see whether any part of the payments qualify as alimony. The following do not qualify
agreement). qualifies as alimony. as alimony.
Page 124 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 127 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Substitute payments. If you must makeTable 18-1.Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
any payments in cash or property after your
spouse’s death as a substitute for continuingPayments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the otherwise qualifying payments, the otherwisefollowing are true: following are true: qualifying payments are not alimony. To the
Payments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or extent that your payments begin, accelerate, or
separation instrument. separation instrument. increase because of the death of your spouse,
otherwise qualifying payments you made mayPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint returnbe treated as payments that were not alimony.return with each other. with each other. Whether or not such payments will be treated as
not alimony depends on all the facts and circum-Payment is in cash (including checks or Payment is:
stances.money orders). • Not in cash,
• A noncash property settlement, Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you
• Spouse’s part of community income, ormust pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.
• To keep up the payer’s property. The payments will stop at the end of 6 years or
upon your former spouse’s death, if earlier.Payment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument asYour former spouse has custody of your mi-as not alimony. not alimony. nor children. The decree provides that if any
child is still a minor at your spouse’s death, youSpouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of
must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until thedivorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are
youngest child reaches the age of majority. Themembers of the same household. members of the same household.
trust income and corpus (principal) are to be
Payments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of theused for your children’s benefit.
recipient spouse. recipient spouse. These facts indicate that the payments to be
made after your former spouse’s death are aPayment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support. substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual
payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay-These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by thements, $10,000 is not alimony.and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the
recipient. Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you
must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.
The payments will stop at the end of 15 years or
Spouses cannot be members of the same upon your former spouse’s death, if earlier. The
• Transfers of services or property (includ-household.  Payments to your spouse whiledecree provides that if your former spouse diesing a debt instrument of a third party or an before the end of the 15-year period, you mustyou are members of the same household are notannuity contract). pay the estate the difference between $450,000alimony if you are legally separated under a
• Execution of a debt instrument by the ($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up todecree of divorce or separate maintenance. A
payor. that time. For example, if your spouse dies at thehome you formerly shared is considered one
end of the tenth year, you must pay the estatehousehold, even if you physically separate your-• The use of property. $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).selves in the home.
These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-You are not treated as members of the samePayments to a third party.Cash payments ment to be made after your former spouse’shousehold if one of you is preparing to leave theto a third party under the terms of your divorce or death is a substitute for the full amount of thehousehold and does leave no later than 1 monthseparation instrument can qualify as cash pay- $30,000 annual payments. None of the annualafter the date of the payment.ments to your spouse. See Payments to a third payments are alimony. The result would be theparty under General Rules, earlier. Exception. If you are not legally separatedsame if the payment required at death were toAlso, cash payments made to a third party atunder a decree of divorce or separate mainte-be discounted by an appropriate interest factorthe written request of your spouse qualify asnance, a payment under a written separationto account for the prepayment.alimony if all the following requirements are met.agreement, support decree, or other court order
may qualify as alimony even if you are membersChild support.A payment that is specifically1. The payments are in lieu of payments ofof the same household when the payment isdesignated as child support or treated as specifi-alimony directly to your spouse. made. cally designated as child support under your
divorce or separation instrument is not alimony.2. The written request states that both
Liability for payments after death of recipientThe designated amount or part may vary fromspouses intend the payments to be treated
spouse. If you must continue to make pay-time to time. Child support payments are neitheras alimony.
ments for any period after your spouse’s death,deductible by the payer nor taxable to the recipi-3. You receive the written request from your ent.the part of the payment that would continue isspouse before you file your return for thenot alimony, whether made before or after theSpecifically designated as child support.year you made the payments. death. If all of the payment would continue, thenA payment will be treated as specifically desig-none of the payments made before or after thenated as child support to the extent that thedeath are alimony.Payments designated as not alimony.You payment is reduced either:
The divorce or separation instrument doesand your spouse can designate that otherwise
1. On the happening of a contingency relatingnot have to expressly state that the paymentsqualifying payments are not alimony. You do this
to your child, orcease upon the death of your spouse if, forby including a provision in your divorce or sepa-
example, the liability for continued paymentsration instrument that states the payments are 2. At a time that can be clearly associatedwould end under state law.not deductible as alimony by you and are ex- with the contingency.cludable from your spouse’s income. For this
A payment may be treated as specifically desig-Example. You must pay your formerpurpose, any instrument (written statement)
nated as child support even if other separatespouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years.signed by both of you that makes this designa-
payments are specifically designated as childYour divorce decree states that the paymentstion and that refers to a previous written separa-
support.will end upon your former spouse’s death. Yoution agreement is treated as a written separation
must also pay your former spouse or your formeragreement. If you are subject to temporary sup- Contingency relating to your child.A
spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year forport orders, the designation must be made in the contingency relates to your child if it depends on
10 years. The death of your spouse would notoriginal or a later temporary support order. any event relating to that child. It does not matter
terminate these payments under state law.Your spouse can exclude the payments from whether the event is certain or likely to occur.
The $10,000 annual payments are alimony.income only if he or she attaches a copy of the Events relating to your child include the child’s:
instrument designating them as not alimony to But because the $20,000 annual payments will• Becoming employed,his or her return. The copy must be attachednot end upon your former spouse’s death, they
each year the designation applies. are not alimony. • Dying,
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 125

Page 128 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Leaving the household,  If you paid alimony to more than one person, • A change in your divorce or separationenter the social security number of one of the• Leaving school, instrument,recipients. Show the social security number and
• Marrying, or • A failure to make timely payments,amount paid to each other recipient on an at-
tached statement. Enter your total payments on• Reaching a specified age or income level. • A reduction in your ability to provide sup-
line 31a. port, or
Clearly associated with a contingency. If you do not provide your spouse’s• A reduction in your spouse’s supportPayments are presumed to be reduced at a time social security number, you may haveneeds.clearly associated with the happening of a con- to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-CAUTION
!
tingency relating to your child only in the follow-tion may be disallowed.ing situations. When to apply the recapture rule.You are
subject to the recapture rule in the third year if1. The payments are to be reduced not more the alimony you pay in the third year decreasesthan 6 months before or after the date the by more than $15,000 from the second year orchild will reach 18, 21, or local age of ma-How To Report the alimony you pay in the second and thirdjority. years decreases significantly from the alimonyAlimony Received2. The payments are to be reduced on two or you pay in the first year.
more occasions that occur not more than 1 When you figure a decrease in alimony, doReport alimony you received on Form 1040, lineyear before or after a different one of your not include the following amounts.11. You cannot use Form 1040A or Formchildren reaches a certain age from 18 to
1040EZ.24. This certain age must be the same for 1. Payments made under a temporary sup-each child, but need not be a whole num- You must give the person who paid port order.ber of years. the alimony your social security num-2. Payments required over a period of atber. If you do not, you may have toIn all other situations, reductions in paymentsCAUTION
!
least 3 calendar years of a fixed part ofpay a $50 penalty.are not treated as clearly associated with the
your income from a business or property,happening of a contingency relating to your
or from compensation for employment orchild.
self-employment.Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-
sumption in the two situations above. This is 3. Payments that decrease because of theRecapture Ruledone by showing that the time at which the death of either spouse or the remarriage ofpayments are to be reduced was determined the spouse receiving the payments.If your alimony payments decrease or terminateindependently of any contingencies relating toduring the first 3 calendar years, you may beyour children. For example, if you can show that
subject to the recapture rule. If you are subject tothe period of alimony payments is customary in Figuring the recapture.You can use Work-this rule, you have to include in income in thethe local jurisdiction, such as a period equal to sheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recapturedthird year part of the alimony payments youone-half of the duration of the marriage, you can alimony.previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct intreat the amount as alimony.
the third year part of the alimony payments he or
she previously included in income. Including the recapture in income.If you
must include a recapture amount in income,The 3-year period starts with the first calen-
How To Deduct show it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony re-dar year you make a payment qualifying as
ceived”). Cross out “received” and enter “recap-alimony under a decree of divorce or separate
Alimony Paid ture.” On the dotted line next to the amount,maintenance or a written separation agreement.
enter your spouse’s last name and social secur-Do not include any time in which payments wereYou can deduct alimony you paid, whether or ity number.being made under temporary support orders.not you itemize deductions on your return. YouThe second and third years are the next 2 calen-must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form dar years, whether or not payments are madeDeducting the recapture.If you can deduct a1040A or Form 1040EZ. during those years. recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, lineEnter the amount of alimony you paid on
31a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and enterThe reasons for a reduction or termination ofForm 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on
“recapture.” In the space provided, enter youralimony payments that can require a recaptureline 31b, enter your spouse’s social security
spouse’s social security number.number. include:
Page 126 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 129 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must reduce your qualified expenses byStudent Loan Interestthe following amounts.
Defined19. • Tax-free interest on U.S. series EE and I
Student loan interest is interest you paid duringsavings bonds (Form 8815). See Figuring
the year on a qualified student loan. It includesthe Tax-Free Amount in chapter 10 of both required and voluntary interest payments.Publication 970.Education-
• Tax-free portion of a distribution from a
qualified tuition program (QTP). See Figur- Qualified Student LoanRelated
ing the Taxable Portion of a Distribution in
This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualifiedchapter 8 of Publication 970. education expenses (defined later) that were:Adjustments • Tax-free portion of a distribution from a• For you, your spouse, or a person whoCoverdell education savings account was your dependent (defined in chapter 3)(ESA). See Figuring the Taxable Portion when you took out the loan,What’s New of a Distribution in chapter 7 of Publication
• Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe-970.
riod of time before or after you took out theKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. • Any reimbursements you received for loan, andThis Act provides tax relief for persons affected
these expenses that were not reported toby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be • For education provided during an aca-you in box 1 of your Form W-2.able to claim a student loan interest deduction demic period for an eligible student.and/or a tuition and fees deduction. See Publi-
cation 4492. How the deduction is claimed.To claim the Loans from the following sources are not qual-
deduction, enter the allowable amount on line 23ified student loans.
of Form 1040, or line 16 of Form 1040A. • A related person.
Introduction • A qualified employer plan.
This chapter discusses the education-related Exceptions. For purposes of the studentadjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-Student Loan Interest loan interest deduction, there are the followingjusted gross income. exceptions to the general rules for dependents.This chapter covers: Deduction • You can have a dependent even if you are• Educator expenses, the dependent of another taxpayer.Generally, personal interest you pay, other than• Student loan interest deduction, and certain mortgage interest, is not deductible.• An individual can be your dependent even
if the individual made a joint return with a• The tuition and fees deduction. However, if your modified adjusted gross in-
spouse.come (MAGI) is less than $65,000 ($135,000 if
filing a joint return) you may be able to take a• An individual can be your dependent evenUseful Items deduction for interest paid on a student loanif the individual had gross income for theYou may want to see: (also known as an education loan) used for year that was equal to or more than the
higher education. For most taxpayers, MAGI isexemption amount for the year ($3,200 forPublication 2005).the adjusted gross income as figured on their
federal income tax return before subtracting any❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
deduction for student loan interest. This deduc-Reasonable period of time.Qualified educa-
tion can reduce the amount of your income sub-tion expenses are treated as paid or incurred
ject to tax by up to $2,500 in 2005. Table 19-1within a reasonable period of time before or after
summarizes the features of the student loanyou take out the loan if they are paid with the
interest deduction. proceeds of student loans that are part of aEducator Expenses
federal postsecondary education loan program.
Even if not paid with the proceeds of thatIf you were an eligible educator in 2005, you canTable 19-1.Student Loan Interest
type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid ordeduct up to $250 of qualified expenses you Deduction at a Glance
incurred within a reasonable period of time ifpaid in 2005 as an adjustment to gross income, Do not rely on this table alone.both of the following requirements are met.rather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduc- Refer to the text for more details.tion. If you and your spouse are filing jointly and 1. The expenses relate to a specific aca-both of you were eligible educators, the maxi-Feature Description demic period, andmum deduction is $500. However, neither Maximum You can decrease yourspouse can deduct more than $250 of his or her 2. The loan proceeds are disbursed within abenefit income subject to tax by up toqualified expenses. period that begins 90 days before the start$2,500.
of that academic period and ends 90 days
Eligible educator.An eligible educator is a Your student loanLoan after the end of that academic period.
qualificationskindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instruc- • must have been taken out
If neither of the above situations applies, thesolely to pay qualifiedtor, counselor, principal, or aide who worked in a
reasonable period of time usually is determinededucation expenses, andschool for at least 900 hours during a school
based on all the relevant facts and circum-• cannot be from a relatedyear. person or made under a stances.
qualified employer plan.Qualified expenses.Qualified expenses in- Academic period. An academic period in-clude ordinary and necessary expenses paid in The student must beStudent cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherconnection with books, supplies, equipment (in-qualifications• you, your spouse, or your period of study (such as a summer school ses-cluding computer equipment, software, and dependent, and sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-• enrolled at least half-timeservices), and other materials used in the class- tional institution. In the case of an educationalin a degree program.room. An ordinary expense is one that is com- institution that uses credit hours or clock hoursmon and accepted in your educational field. ATime limit on You can deduct interest paidand does not have academic terms, each pay-necessary expense is one that is helpful anddeduction during the remaining period of ment period can be treated as an academicappropriate for your profession as an educator. your student loan. period.An expense does not have to be required to be
Phaseout The amount of your deductionconsidered necessary. Eligible student.This is a student who wasdepends on your income level.Qualified expenses do not include expenses enrolled at least half-time in a program leading
for home schooling or for nonathletic supplies to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu-
for courses in health or physical education. cational credential.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 127

Page 130 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Enrolled at least half-time.A student was tion, a hospital, or a health care facility that lender, such as commitment fees or
enrolled at least half-time if the student was offers postgraduate training. processing costs.
taking at least half the normal full-time work load An educational institution must meet the• Interest you paid on a loan to the extentfor his or her course of study. above criteria only during the academic payments were made through your partici-period(s) for which the student loan was in-The standard for what is half of the normal pation in the National Health Servicecurred. The deductibility of interest on the loan isfull-time work load is determined by each eligible
Corps Loan Repayment Program (thenot affected by the institution’s subsequent losseducational institution. However, the standard
“NHSC Loan Repayment Program”) orof eligibility.may not be lower than any of those established
certain other state loan repayment pro-by the Department of Education under the The educational institution should begrams. This is effective beginning JanuaryHigher Education Act of 1965. able to tell you if it is an eligible educa-1, 2004. For more information, see Stu-tional institution.
TIP
Loan from a related person.You cannot de- dent Loan Repayment Assistance in Publi-
duct interest on a loan you get from a related cation 970. person. Related persons include: Adjustments to qualified education ex-
penses. You must reduce your qualified edu-• Your spouse, cation expenses by certain tax-free items (suchCan You Claim the• Your brothers and sisters, as the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
Deductionships). See chapter 4 of Publication 970 for• Your half brothers and half sisters, details. Generally, you can claim the deduction if all• Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, three of the following requirements are met.etc.),
Include As Interest• Your lineal descendants (children, grand- • Your filing status is any filing status except
children, etc.), and married filing separately.In addition to simple interest on the loan, certain
loan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter-• Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts, • No one else is claiming an exemption for
est on revolving lines of credit, and interest onand exempt organizations. you on his or her tax return.refinanced student loans can be student loan
• You paid interest on a qualified studentinterest if all other requirements are met.Loan from a qualified employer plan.You loan.Loan origination fee.This is a one-time feecannot deduct interest on a loan made under a
charged by the lender for the use of money,qualified employer plan or under a contract pur-
Expenses paid by others.If you are the per-which is treated as interest accrued over the lifechased under such a plan.
son legally obligated to make interest paymentsof the loan. This payment cannot be for property
or services provided by the lender, such as com- and someone else makes a payment of interest
mitment fees or processing costs. on your behalf, you are treated as receiving the
Qualified Education Expenses
payments from the other person and, in turn,Capitalized interest. This is unpaid interestGenerally, for purposes of the student loan inter- paying the interest. See chapter 4 of Publicationon a student loan that is added by the lender toest deduction, these expenses are the total 970 for more information.the outstanding principal balance of the loan.costs of attending an eligible educational institu-
tion, including graduate school. They includeInterest on revolving lines of credit.This
amounts paid for the following items. interest, which includes interest on credit cardNo Double Benefit Allowed
debt, is student loan interest if the borrower uses• Tuition and fees. You cannot deduct as interest on a student loanthe line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali-
• Room and board. fied education expenses. See Qualified Educa-any amount that is an allowable deduction under
tion Expenses, earlier. any other provision of the tax law (for example,• Books, supplies, and equipment.
home mortgage interest).Interest on refinanced student loans.This• Other necessary expenses (such as trans-
includes interest on both:portation).
Who Can Claim a• Consolidated loans—loans used to refi-The cost of room and board qualifies only tonance more than one student loan of theDependent’s Expensesthe extent that it is not more than the greater ofsame borrower, andthe following amounts. You can deduct interest paid on a student loan• Collapsed loans—two or more loans of for your dependent only if you:• The allowance for room and board, as de- the same borrower that are treated by
termined by the eligible educational institu-both the lender and the borrower as one• Are legally obligated to make the interesttion, that was included in the cost of loan. payments,attendance (for federal financial aid pur-
poses) for a particular academic period • Actually made the payments during the taxIf you refinance a qualified studentand living arrangement of the student. year, andloan for more than your original loan
• The actual amount charged if the student and you use the additional amount for• Claim an exemption for your dependent onCAUTION
!
is residing in housing owned or operatedany purpose other than qualified education ex-your tax return.by the eligible educational institution.penses, you cannot deduct any interest paid on
the refinanced loan.
How Much Can YouEligible educational institution.An eligible Voluntary interest payments. These areeducational institution is any college, university,payments made on a qualified student loan dur-Deductvocational school, or other postsecondary edu-ing a period when interest payments are notcational institution eligible to participate in a stu- Your student loan interest deduction for 2005 isrequired, such as when the borrower has beendent aid program administered by the granted a deferment or the loan has not yet generally the smaller of:Department of Education. It includes virtually allentered repayment status.accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri- • $2,500, or
vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in- • The interest you paid in 2005.stitutions. Do Not Include As InterestCertain educational institutions located The amount determined above is phased outoutside the United States also participate in theYou cannot claim a student loan interest deduc-(gradually reduced) if your MAGI is betweenU.S. Department of Education’s Federal Stu-tion for: $50,000 and $65,000 ($105,000 and $135,000 ifdent Aid (FSA) programs. • Interest you paid on a loan if under theyou file a joint return). You cannot take a studentFor purposes of the student loan interest terms of the loan, you are not legally obli-loan interest deduction if your MAGI is $65,000deduction, an eligible educational institutiongated to make interest payments. or more ($135,000 or more if you file a jointalso includes an institution conducting an intern-
return). For details on figuring your MAGI, seeship or residency program leading to a degree or• Loan origination fees that are payments
certificate from an institution of higher educa- chapter 4 of Publication 970.for property or services provided by the
Page 128 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 131 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. The eligible student is yourself, yourPayments with borrowed funds. You canHow Do You Figure the spouse, or a dependent for whom you claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualified
Deduction claim an exemption (defined in chapter 3) education expenses paid with the proceeds of a
on your tax return. loan. You use the expenses to figure the deduc-
Generally, you figure the deduction using the tion for the year in which the expenses are paid,Qualified education expenses are definedStudent Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet in not the year in which the loan is repaid. Treatunder What Expenses Qualify. Eligible studentsthe Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. loan payments sent directly to the educationalare defined later under Who Is an Eligible Stu-However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, institution as paid on the date the institutiondent.or 4563, or you are excluding income from credits the student’s account.
sources within Puerto Rico, you must complete
Student withdraws from class(es).You canWorksheet 4-1 in chapter 4 of Publication 970.
Who Cannot Claim the Deduction claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualifiedTo help you figure your student loan interest education expenses not refunded when a stu-deduction, you should receive Form 1098-E,You cannot claim the tuition and fees deductiondent withdraws.Student Loan Interest Statement. Generally, anif any of the following apply.institution (such as a bank or governmental
agency) that received interest payments of $600• Your filing status is married filing sepa-Qualified Education Expensesor more during 2005 on one or more qualifiedrately.
student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac- For purposes of the tuition and fees deduction,• Another person can claim an exemptionceptable substitute) to each borrower by Janu- qualified education expenses are tuition andfor you as a dependent on his or her taxary 31, 2006. certain related expenses required for enrollmentreturn. You cannot take the deductionFor qualified student loans taken out before or attendance at an eligible educational institu-even if the other person does not actuallySeptember 1, 2004, the institution is required to tion.claim that exemption.include on Form 1098-E only payments of stated
• Your modified adjusted gross income Eligible educational institution.An eligibleinterest. Other interest payments, such as cer-
(MAGI) is more than $80,000 ($160,000 ifeducational institution is any college, university,tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter-
filing a joint return). vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-est, may not appear on the form you receive.
cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-However, if you pay qualifying interest that is not• You were a nonresident alien for any partdent aid program administered by theincluded on Form 1098-E, you can also deductof the year and did not elect to be treatedDepartment of Education. It includes virtually allthose amounts. For information on allocatingas a resident alien for tax purposes. Moreaccredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-payments between interest and principal, seeinformation on nonresident aliens can bevately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-chapter 4 of Publication 970. found in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guidestitutions. The educational institution should be To claim the deduction, enter the allowablefor Aliens. able to tell you if it is an eligible educationalamount on line 33 (Form 1040), or line 18 (Form• You or anyone else claims a Hope or life-institution.1040A). time learning credit in 2005 with respect toCertain educational institutions located
expenses of the student for whom the outside the United States also participate in the
qualified education expenses were paid.U.S. Department of Education’s FSA programs.
Related expenses. Student-activity fees andTuition and Fees expenses for course-related books, supplies,Table 19-2.Tuition and Fees and equipment are included in qualified educa-Deduction Deduction at a Glance tion expenses only if the fees and expenses
Do not rely on this table alone.must be paid to the institution as a condition ofYou may be able to deduct qualified education Refer to the text for more details.enrollment or attendance.expenses paid during the year for yourself, your
spouse, or a dependent. You cannot claim thisQuestion Answer
deduction if your filing status is married filing
What is the You can decrease your income No Double Benefit Allowedseparately or if another person can claim anmaximum subject to tax by up to $4,000.exemption for you as a dependent on his or herbenefit?  You cannot do any of the following.tax return. The qualified expenses must be for
higher education, as explained later under What • Deduct qualified education expenses youWhere is As an adjustment to income on
the Form 1040, line 34, or 1040A,Expenses Qualify. deduct under any other provision of the
deduction line 16. law, for example, as a business expense,The tuition and fees deduction can reducetaken?the amount of your income subject to tax by up • Deduct qualified education expenses for ato $4,000. For whom A student enrolled in an eligible student on your income tax return if you ormust the educational institution who isTable 19-2 summarizes the features of the anyone else claims a Hope or lifetimeexpenses either:tuition and fees deduction. learning credit for that same student in thebe paid? • you, same year,• your spouse, orYou may be able to take a credit for
• your dependent for whom youyour education expenses instead of a • Deduct qualified education expenses thatclaim an exemption.deduction. You can choose the one have been used to figure the tax-free por-
TIP
that will give you the lower tax. See chapter 35 tion of a distribution from a Coverdell edu-What Tuition and fees required for
for details about the credits. cation savings account (ESA) or atuition and enrollment or attendance at an
fees are eligible postsecondary qualified tuition program (QTP). For a
deductible? educational institution, but not QTP, this applies only to the amount ofCan You Claim the including personal, living, or tax-free earnings that were distributed, notfamily expenses, such as roomDeduction to the recovery of contributions to the pro-and board. gram. See Figuring the Taxable Portion ofThe following rules will help you determine if you a Distribution in chapter 7 (Coverdell ESA)can claim the tuition and fees deduction. and in chapter 8 (QTP) of Publication 970.
What Expenses Qualify • Deduct qualified education expenses that
have been paid with tax-free interest onWho Can Claim the Deduction The tuition and fees deduction is based on quali-U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815). See Fig-fied education expenses you pay for yourself,uring the Tax-Free Amount in chapter 10Generally, you can claim the tuition and feesyour spouse, or a dependent for whom you claimof Publication 970.deduction if all three of the following require-an exemption on your tax return. Generally, thements are met. deduction is allowed for qualified education ex-• Deduct qualified education expenses that
penses paid in 2005 in connection with enroll- have been paid with tax-free scholarship,1. You paid qualified education expenses ofment at an institution of higher education during grant, or employer-provided educationalhigher education. 2005 or for an academic period (defined earlier assistance. See the following section on
2. You paid the education expenses for an under Student Loan Interest Deduction) begin- Adjustments to qualified education ex-
eligible student. ning in 2005 or in the first 3 months of 2006. penses.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 129

Page 132 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjustments to qualified education ex- • Medical expenses (including student Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. How-
penses. If you paid qualified education ex- health fees), ever, if you are filing Form 2555, Form 2555-EZ,
penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannot or Form 4563, or if you exclude income from• Room and board,claim a deduction for those amounts. You must sources within Puerto Rico, you must complete
• Transportation, orreduce the qualified education expenses by the the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 970.
amount of any tax-free educational assistance To help you figure your tuition and fees de-• Similar personal, living, or family ex-and refunds you received. duction, you should receive Form 1098-T, Tui-penses. tion Statement. Generally, an eligibleTax-free educational assistance.This in- This is true even if the amount must be paid toeducational institution (such as a college or uni-cludes: the institution as a condition of enrollment orversity) must send Form 1098-T (or acceptable
attendance.• Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow- substitute) to each enrolled student by January
ships (see chapter 1 of Publication 970), 31, 2006.
Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit To claim the deduction, enter the allowable• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationcourses. Qualified education expenses gen-amount on Form 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A,970), erally do not include expenses that relate to anyline 19.
• Employer-provided educational assistance course of instruction or other education that in-
(see chapter 11 of Publication 970), volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non-Table 19-3.Who Can Claim a
credit course. However, if the course of Dependent’s Expenses?• Veterans’ educational assistance (seeinstruction or other education is part of thechapter 1 of Publication 970), and Do not rely on this table alone.student’s degree program, these expenses can See Who Can Claim a• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentsqualify. Dependent’s Expenses in chapter(other than gifts or inheritances) received 6 of Publication 970.Comprehensive or bundled fees.Some eli-as educational assistance. gible educational institutions combine all of theirIF yourfees for an academic period into one amount. Ifdependent isRefunds. Qualified education expenses doyou do not receive, or do not have access to, anan eligiblenot include expenses for which you, or someoneallocation showing how much you paid for quali-student andelse who paid qualified education expenses onfied education expenses and how much you you... AND... THEN...behalf of a student, receive a refund. (For infor-paid for personal expenses, such as those listedmation on expenses paid by a dependent stu- claim an you paid only you canabove, contact the institution. The institution isdent or third party, see Who Can Claim a exemption for all deduct therequired to make this allocation and provide youyour qualified qualifiedDependent’s Expenses, later.) with the amount you paid (or were billed) fordependent education educationIf a refund of expenses paid in 2005 is re-qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T, expenses expenses thatceived before you file your tax return for 2005,Tuition Statement. See How Do You Figure the for your you paid. Yoursimply reduce the amount of the expenses paidDeduction, later, for more information about dependent dependent cannotby the amount of the refund received. If the take a deduction.Form 1098-T.refund is received after you file your 2005 tax
claim an your no one  is allowedreturn, see When Must the Deduction Be Repaid
exemption fordependent to take a(Recaptured), in chapter 6 of Publication 970.Who Is an Eligible Student
your paid all deduction.You are considered to receive a refund of dependent qualifiedFor purposes of the tuition and fees deduction,expenses when an eligible educational institu- educationan eligible student is a student who is enrolled intion refunds loan proceeds to the lender on be- expensesone or more courses at an eligible educationalhalf of the borrower. Follow the above
institution. The student must have either a highinstructions according to when you are consid- do not claim you paid no one is allowed
school diploma or a General Educational Devel-an exemption all to take aered to receive the refund.
for your qualified deduction.opment (GED) credential.Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa- dependent, education
tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu- but are expenses
Who Can Claim acation expenses by amounts paid with funds the eligible to
student receives as: Dependent’s Expenses do not claim your no one  is allowed
an exemption dependent to take a• Payment for services, such as wages, Generally, to claim the tuition and fees deduc-for your paid all deduction.• A loan, tion for qualified education expenses for a de-dependent, qualified
but are educationpendent, you must:• A gift, eligible to expenses• Have paid the expenses, and• An inheritance, or are not you  paid only your• Claim an exemption for the student as aeligible to all dependent can• A withdrawal from the student’s personal dependent. claim an qualified deduct thesavings.
exemption for education amount you paid.Table 19-3 summarizes who can claim the de-your expenses The amount youDo not reduce the qualified education ex-duction. dependent paid is treated aspenses by any scholarship or fellowship re- a gift to yourported as income on the student’s tax return in dependent.How Much Can Youthe following situations.
are not your only yourDeduct• The use of the money is restricted to costs eligible to dependent dependent  canof attendance (such as room and board) claim an paid all take a deduction.The maximum tuition and fees deduction inother than qualified education expenses. exemption for qualified2005 is $4,000, $2,000, or $0, depending on theyour education• The use of the money is not restricted andamount of your MAGI. For details on figuringdependent expensesis used to pay education expenses thatyour MAGI, see chapter 6 of Publication 970.
are not qualified (such as room and
board).
How Do You Figure the Deduction
Expenses That Do Not Qualify Generally, you figure the deduction using the
Tuition and Fees Deduction Worksheet in theQualified education expenses do not include
amounts paid for:
• Insurance,
Page 130 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 133 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtract theStandard deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the standard
deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deductions for cer-Deduction and tain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten chapters in
this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction, and the limit
Itemized on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross income exceeds
certain amounts. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider when deciding
whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deductions.
Deductions
• You are a nonresident or dual-status alien Table 20-2. You qualify for this benefit if you are
during the year. You are considered a totally or partly blind.
dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-20. Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you mustdent and resident alien during the year.
get a certified statement from an eye doctor orNote. If you are a nonresident alien who is
registered optometrist that:married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the
end of the year, you can choose to beStandard • You cannot see better than 20/200 in thetreated as a U.S. resident. (See Publicationbetter eye with glasses or contact lenses,519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you orDeduction make this choice, you can take the stan-
• Your field of vision is not more than 20dard deduction.
degrees.
If an exemption for you can beWhat’s New If your eye condition will never improve be-claimed on another person’s returnyond these limits, the statement should include(such as your parents’ return), yourCAUTION
!
Increase in standard deduction.The stan- this fact. You must keep the statement in yourstandard deduction may be limited. See Stan-dard deduction for most taxpayers who do not records.dard Deduction for Dependents, later.itemize deductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 If your vision can be corrected beyond theseis higher in 2005 than it was in 2004. The limits only by contact lenses that you can wearamount depends on your filing status. There are only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,tables at the end of this chapter to help you you can take the higher standard deduction forfigure your standard deduction for 2005. Standard Deduction blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Amount
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
Introduction
You can take the higher standard deduction ifThe standard deduction amount depends onThis chapter discusses: your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or
• How to figure the amount of your standardblind, and whether an exemption can be claimed• You file a joint return, ordeduction, for you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-• You file a separate return and can claimdard deduction amounts are adjusted each year• The standard deduction for dependents, an exemption for your spouse becausefor inflation. The standard deduction amountsand your spouse had no gross income and anfor most taxpayers for 2005 are shown in Tableexemption for your spouse could not be• Who should itemize deductions. 20-1. claimed by another taxpayer.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either takingDecedent’s final return.The amount of the
a standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-standard deduction for a decedent’s final tax You cannot claim the higher standardtions. The standard deduction is a dollar amountreturn is the same as it would have been had the deduction for an individual other thanthat reduces the amount of income on which youdecedent continued to live. However, if the de- yourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
are taxed. cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,
The standard deduction is a benefit that elim-the higher standard deduction for age cannot be
inates the need for many taxpayers to itemizeclaimed.
actual deductions, such as medical expenses, Examplescharitable contributions, and taxes, on Schedule
A of Form 1040. The standard deduction isHigher Standard Deduction The following examples illustrate how to deter-
higher for taxpayers who are 65 or older or blind. mine your standard deduction using Tables 20-1for Age (65 or Older)If you have a choice, you should use the method and 20-2.
that gives you the lower tax.    If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, areYou benefit from the standard deduc-or older at the end of the year. You are consid-filing a joint return for 2005. Neither is blind.tion if your standard deduction is moreered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.They decide not to itemize their deductions.than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-They use Table 20-1. Their standard deductionized deductions. duction for 2005 if you were born before Januaryis $10,000.
2, 1941.Persons not eligible for the standard
Example 2. Assume the same facts as inUse Table 20-2 to figure the standard deduc-deduction. Your standard deduction is zero
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endtion amount.and you should itemize any deductions you
of 2005. Larry and Donna use Table 20-2. Theirhave if:
standard deduction is $11,000.• You are married and filing a separate re-Higher Standard Deductionturn, and your spouse itemizes deduc- Example 3. Bill, 72, and Terry, 66, are filingfor Blindnesstions, a joint return for 2005. Neither is blind. They
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use• You are filing a tax return for a short tax If you are blind on the last day of the year and
Table 20-2. Their standard deduction isyear because of a change in your annual you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled
$12,000.accounting period, or to a higher standard deduction as shown in
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 131

Page 134 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
married filing a separate return, he enters• Had large uninsured casualty or theft
$5,000 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $4,050 as losses,Standard Deduction his standard deduction because it is smaller• Made large contributions to qualified chari-than $5,000, the amount on line 6.for Dependents ties, or
• Have total itemized deductions that areExample 3. Amy, who is single, is claimedThe standard deduction for an individual for more than the standard deduction to whichon her parents’ 2005 tax return. She is 18 yearswhom an exemption can be claimed on another you otherwise are entitled.old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300person’s tax return is generally limited to theand wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-greater of: These deductions are explained in chaptersductions. Amy uses Table 20-3 to find her stan-21–28.• $800, or dard deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900
If you decide to itemize your deductions, com-on line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters• The individual’s earned income for the plete Schedule A and attach it to your Form$3,150 on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150,year plus $250 (but not more than the reg- 1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, linethe larger of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single,ular standard deduction amount, generally 28, on Form 1040, line 40.Amy enters $5,000 on line 6. She enters $3,150$5,000). on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts onElecting to itemize for state tax or otherlines 5 and 6. Because she checked one box inHowever, if the individual is 65 or older or purposes. Even if your itemized deductionsthe top part of the worksheet, she enters $1,250blind, the standard deduction may be higher. are less than the amount of your standard de-on line 7b. She then adds the amounts on linesIf an exemption for you (or your spouse if you duction, you can elect to itemize deductions on7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction ofare filing jointly) can be claimed on someone your federal return rather than take the standard$4,400 on line 7c.else’s return, use Table 20-3 to determine your deduction. You may want to do this, for example,
standard deduction. if the tax benefit of being able to itemize your
deductions on your state tax return is greaterEarned income defined.Earned income is than the tax benefit you lose on your federalsalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andWho Should Itemize return by not taking the standard deduction. Toother amounts received as pay for work you make this election, you must check the box onactually perform. You should itemize deductions if your total de-line 29 of Schedule A. For purposes of the standard deduction,ductions are more than the standard deductionearned income also includes any part of a schol- Changing your mind. If you do not itemizeamount. Also, you should itemize if you do notarship or fellowship grant that you must include your deductions and later find that you shouldqualify for the standard deduction, as discussedin your gross income. See Scholarship and Fel- have itemized — or if you itemize your deduc-earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-lowship Grants in chapter 1 of Publication 970 tions and later find you should not have — youdard deduction.for more information on what qualifies as a can change your return by filing Form 1040X, You should first figure your itemized deduc-scholarship or fellowship grant. Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.tions and compare that amount to your standardSee Amended Returns and Claims for Refund indeduction to make sure you are using theExample 1. Michael is single. His parents chapter 1 for more information on amended re-method that gives you the greater benefit.claim an exemption for him on their 2005 tax turns.
return. He has interest income of $780 and You may be subject to a limit on someMarried persons who filed separatewages of $150. He has no itemized deductions. of your itemized deductions if yourreturns. You can change methods of takingMichael uses Table 20-3 to find his standard adjusted gross income (AGI) is moreCAUTION
!
deductions only if you and your spouse bothdeduction. He enters $150 (his earned income)than $145,950 ($72,975 if you are married filingmake the same changes. Both of you must file aon line 1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $800separately). See chapter 29 and the instructionsconsent to assessment for any additional tax(the larger of $400 and $800) on line 5, andfor Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, for moreeither one may owe as a result of the change.$5,000 on line 6. The amount of his standardinformation on figuring the correct amount ofYou and your spouse can use the methoddeduction, on line 7a, is $800 (the smaller ofyour itemized deductions. that gives you the lower total tax, even though$800 and $5,000). When to itemize. You may benefit from one of you may pay more tax than you would
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Formhave paid by using the other method. You bothExample 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-1040) if you: must use the same method of claiming deduc-lege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2005 tax tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otherreturn. Joe is married and files a separate return.• Do not qualify for the standard deduction,should itemize because he or she will not qualifyHis wife does not itemize deductions on her or the amount you can claim is limited,for the standard deduction. See Persons notseparate return. • Had large uninsured medical and dentaleligible for the standard deduction, earlier.Joe has $1,500 in interest income and expenses during the year,wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-
tions. Joe finds his standard deduction by using• Paid interest and taxes on your home,
Table 20-3. He enters his earned income, • Had large unreimbursed employee busi-$3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 andness expenses or other miscellaneous de-enters $4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he entersductions,$4,050, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is
Page 132 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 135 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 20-3.Standard Deduction Worksheet2005 Standard Deduction Tables for Dependents
If you are married filling a separate return and your spouse Use this worksheet only if someone else can
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born married filing jointly).CAUTION
!
before January 2, 1941, or you are blind.
If you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are blind,
Table 20-1.Standard Deduction Chart check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
worksheet.for Most People*
Born beforeTHEN your You January 2, 1941 Blind standard
IF your filing status is... deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $ 5,000 Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 Blind Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child 10,000
Head of household 7,300
* Do not use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are blind,Total number of boxes you checked
or if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married
filing jointly). Use Table 20-2 or 20-3 instead. 1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2. $250
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.Table 20-2.Standard Deduction Chart for People
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $800Born Before January 2, 1941, or
Who are Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the6. Enter the amount shown below for yourchart. filing status.Born beforeYou • Single or Married filing separately—January 2, 1941 Blind 
$5,000 6.
Your spouse, if claiming Born before • Married filing jointly or Qualifyingspouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 Blind widow(er) with dependent child—
$10,000
• Head of household—$7,300Total number of boxes you checked
7. Standard deduction.THEN your
AND the number standard a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
IF your in the box above deduction If born after January 1, 1941, and
filing status is... is... is... not blind, stop here. This is your
standard deduction. Otherwise, goSingle 1 $ 6,250 on to line 7b. 7a.2 7,500
b. If born before January 2, 1941, orMarried filing jointly or 1 11,000 blind, multiply $1,250 ($1,000 ifQualifying widow(er) 2 12,000 married or qualifying widow(er) withwith dependent child 3 13,000 dependent child) by the number in
4 14,000 the box above. 7b.
Married filing 1 6,000 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
separately 2 7,000 standard deduction for 2005. 7c.
3 8,000
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,4 9,000 and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarshipHead of household 1 8,550
that you must include in your income.2 9,800
* If someone can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table 20-3, instead.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 133

Page 136 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In this chapter, the term “7.5% limit” is used
to refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.What Are Medical The phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” is also21. used. This phrase means that you must subtractExpenses? 7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income from
your medical expenses to figure your medicalMedical expenses are the costs of diagnosis,expense deduction.cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis-Medical and
ease, and the costs for treatments affecting anyExample. Your adjusted gross income ispart or function of the body. They include the$40,000, 7.5% of which is $3,000. You paidDental Expenses costs of equipment, supplies, and diagnosticmedical expenses of $2,500. You cannot deductdevices needed for these purposes. They alsoany of your medical expenses because they areinclude dental expenses. not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-Medical care expenses must be primarily toWhat’s New come.alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect
or illness. Do not include expenses that areStandard mileage rate.The standard mile- merely beneficial to general health, such as vita-age rate allowed for out-of-pocket expenses formins or a vacation.a car when you use it for medical reasons is: Whose MedicalMedical expenses include the premiums you
• 15 cents a mile from January 1 to Augustpay for insurance that covers the expenses of
31, 2005, and Expensesmedical care, and the amounts you pay for
transportation to get medical care. Medical ex-• 22 cents a mile from September 1 to De- Can You Include?penses also include amounts paid for qualifiedcember 31, 2005. long-term care services and limited amounts
See Transportation under What Medical Ex- You can generally include medical expensespaid for any qualified long-term care insurance
penses Are Includible. you pay for yourself as well as those you pay forcontract.
someone who was your spouse or your depen-Dependent. Beginning in 2005, you will use dent either when the services were provided ornew rules to determine if a person qualifies as when you paid for them. There are different rulesyour dependent. See Dependent under Whose for decedents and for individuals who are theWhat Expenses CanMedical Expenses Can You Include. subject of multiple support agreements.
You Include This Year?What if you are claimed as a dependent on
some else’s return? Even if you, or yourYou can include only the medical and dentalReminders spouse if you are filing a joint return, are claimedexpenses you paid this year, regardless of when
as a dependent on someone else’s tax return,the services were provided. If you pay medical
Health coverage tax credit.There is a credit you can include the medical expenses of anyexpenses by check, the day you mail or deliver
for health insurance premiums paid by certain person you could have claimed as a dependentthe check generally is the date of payment. If
workers who are displaced by foreign trade or if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, were notyou use a “pay-by-phone” or “online” account to
who are receiving a pension from the Pension being claimed as a dependent on some else’spay your medical expenses, the date reported
Benefit Guaranty Corporation. For more infor- return.on the statement of the financial institution
mation, see Health Coverage Tax Credit in showing when payment was made is the date of
chapter 37. payment. If you use a credit card, include medi-Spousecal expenses you charge to your credit card in
the year the charge is made, not when youYou can include medical expenses you paid for
actually pay the amount charged. your spouse. To include these expenses, you
Introduction must have been married either at the time your
Separate returns.If you and your spouse livespouse received the medical services or at theThis chapter will help you determine: in a noncommunity property state and file sepa-time you paid the medical expenses.
rate returns, each of you can include only the• What medical expenses are,
medical expenses each actually paid. Any medi-Example 1. Mary received medical treat-• What expenses you can include this year,cal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for the
count in which you and your spouse have the• How much of the expenses you can de- treatment after they married. Bill can include
same interest are considered to have been paidduct, these expenses in figuring his medical expense
equally by each of you, unless you can showdeduction even if Bill and Mary file separate• Whose medical expenses you can include,otherwise. returns.
• What medical expenses are includible, If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could notCommunity property states. If you and
include Mary’s expenses in his separate return.your spouse live in a community property state• How you treat reimbursements,
Mary would include the amounts she paid duringand file separate returns, any medical expenses• How to report the deduction on your taxpaid out of community funds are divided equally. the year in her separate return. If they filed areturn, Each of you should include half the expenses. Ifjoint return, the medical expenses both paid
medical expenses are paid out of the separateduring the year would be used to figure their• How to report impairment-related work ex-
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidmedical expense deduction.penses, and
the medical expenses can include them. If you• How to report health insurance costs if youlive in a community property state, are married,Example 2. This year, John paid medicalare self-employed. and file a separate return, see Publication 555,expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.
Community Property. John married Belle this year and they file a joint
return. Because John was married to LouiseUseful Items when she received the medical services, he canYou may want to see: include those expenses in figuring his medical
deduction for this year.Publications How Much of the
❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses Expenses Can You Dependent
❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other You can include medical expenses you paid forDeduct?Tax-Favored Health Plans your dependent. For you to include these ex-
penses, the person must have been your depen-You can deduct only the amount of your medicalForm (and Instructions) dent either at the time the medical services wereand dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of
provided or at the time you paid the expenses. A❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line
person generally qualifies as your dependent forDeductions 38).
Page 134 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 137 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
purposes of the medical expense deduction if a. Under age 19, before adoption negotiations began, you cannot
both of the following requirements are met. include them as medical expenses.b. Under age 24 and a full-time student, or
You may be able to take a credit or1. The person was a qualifying child or a c. Permanently and totally disabled, exclusion for other expenses relatedqualifying relative, and
to adoption. See the Instructions for
TIP
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2005,2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, Form 8839, for more information.andor a resident of the United States, Canada,
or Mexico. If your qualifying child was4. Did not provide over half of his or her ownChild of divorced or separated parents.Foradopted, see Exception for adopted child. support for 2005. purposes of the medical and dental expenses
deduction, a child of divorced or separated par-Exception for adopted child.If you are a
Adopted child. A legally adopted child isents can be treated as a dependent of bothU.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted
parents. Each parent can include the medicalchild lived with you as a member of your house- treated as your own child. This includes a child
hold for 2005, that child does not have to be a expenses he or she pays for the child, even if thelawfully placed with you for legal adoption.
U.S. citizen or national or a resident of the other parent claims the child’s dependency ex-You can include medical expenses that you
United States, Canada, or Mexico. emption, if:paid for a child before adoption if the child quali-
fied as your dependent when the medical serv-
1. The child is in the custody of one or bothices were provided or when the expenses wereQualifying Child parents for more than half the year,paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other2. The child receives over half of his or herA qualifying child is a child who:
persons for medical expenses they paid undersupport during the year from his or her
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, fosteran agreement with you, you are treated as hav-parents, and
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis-ing paid those expenses provided you clearly3. The child’s parents:ter, or a descendant of any of them (forsubstantiate that the payment is directly attribu-
example, your grandchild, niece, or table to the medical care of the child. a. Are divorced or legally separated undernephew), But if you pay the agency or other person fora decree of divorce or separate mainte-
medical care that was provided and paid for2. At the end of 2005 was: nance,
Table 21-1.Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance
insurance premiums included in a car insurance• Birth control pills prescribed • Bottled water
policy covering all personsby your doctor • Medical services fees (from• Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your cardoctors, dentists, surgeons,• Capital expenses for (see Publication 969)
specialists, and other • Medicine you buy withoutequipment or • Diaper service
medical practitioners) a prescriptionimprovements to your • Expenses for your general
home needed for medical • Oxygen equipment and • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following your
care (see Publication 502) oxygen baby doctor’s advice) such as—
• Certain fertility • Part of life-care fee paid to • Prescription drugs you—Health club dues
enhancement procedures retirement home designated brought in (or ordered—Household help (even if
(see Publication 502) for medical care shipped) from anotherrecommended by a doctor)
country, in most cases• Certain weight-loss • Prescription medicines —Social activities, such as
(see Publication 502)expenses for obesity (prescribed by a doctor) dancing or swimming lessons
and insulin —Trip for general health • Nutritional supplements,• Diagnostic devices
improvement vitamins, herbal• Psychiatric and• Expenses of an organ
supplements, “naturalpsychological treatment • Flexible spending accountdonor
medicines,” etc., unlessreimbursements for medical• Social Security tax,• Eye surgery—to promote recommended by aexpenses (if contributionsMedicare tax, FUTA, andthe correct function of the medical practitioner as awere on a pre-tax basis) (seestate employment tax foreye treatment for a specificPublication 502)worker providing medical• Guide dogs or other medical conditioncare (see Wages for • Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, diagnosed by a physiciannursing services, below) expensesdeaf, and disabled • Surgery for purely• Special items (artificial • Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab cosmetic reasons (seelimbs, false teeth, payments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing Publication 502)eye-glasses, contact expenses (see Publicationservices, surgery, etc.) • Toothpaste, toiletries,lenses, hearing aids, 502)• Lead-based paint removal cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.)• Illegal operation or treatment(see Publication 502) • Teeth whitening• Special education for • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion mentally or physically • Weight-loss expenses notprotection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent disabled persons (see for the treatment of obesityproviding payment for loss ofhaving children such as a Publication 502) or other diseaselife, limb, sight, etc.vasectomy or tubal ligation• Stop-smoking programs • Maternity clothes• Long-term care contracts, • Transportation for neededqualified (see Publication medical care502)
• Treatment at a drug or• Meals and lodging provided alcohol center (includesby a hospital during meals and lodging providedmedical treatment by the center)
• Wages for nursing services
(see Publication 502)
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 135

Page 138 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Are separated under a written separa- stated in the insurance contract or given to youDecedenttion agreement, or in a separate statement.
Medical expenses paid before death by the de-c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 Note. When figuring the amount of insur-cedent are included in figuring any deduction formonths of the year. ance premiums you can deduct on Schedule A,medical and dental expenses on the decedent’sdo not include any health coverage tax creditfinal income tax return. This includes expensesThis does not apply if the child’s exemption is advance payments shown in box 1 of Formfor the decedent’s spouse and dependents asbeing claimed under a multiple support agree- 1099-H. Also, if you are claiming the healthwell as for the decedent.ment. coverage tax credit, subtract the amount shownThe survivor or personal representative of aon line 4 of Form 8885 (reduced by any advancedecedent can choose to treat certain expensespayments shown on line 6 of that form) from thepaid by the decedent’s estate for the decedent’sQualifying Relative total insurance premiums you paid.medical care as paid by the decedent at the time
A qualifying relative is a person: the medical services were provided. The ex-Employer-sponsored health insurance plan.
penses must be paid within the 1-year periodDo not include in your medical and dental ex-1. Who is your: beginning with the day after the date of death. Ifpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040) any insur-
you are the survivor or personal representativeance premiums paid by an employer-sponsoreda. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, ormaking this choice, you must attach a statementhealth insurance plan unless the premiums area descendant of any of them (for exam-to the decedent’s Form 1040 (or the decedent’sincluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. Also, do notple, your grandchild), amended return, Form 1040X) saying that theinclude on Schedule A (Form 1040) any other
expenses have not been and will not be claimedb. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of medical and dental expenses paid by the plan
on the estate tax return.either of them, unless the amount paid is included in box 1 of
your Form W-2.Qualified medical expenses paidc. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib-
before death by the decedent are notling of either of them (for example, your Example. You are a federal employee par-deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-grandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un-CAUTION
!
ticipating in the premium conversion plan of thebution from any Archer MSA or health savingscle), Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-account.d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paidAmended returns and claims for refund arestepmother, son-in-law, by making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.discussed in chapter 1.daughter-in-law, father-in-law, Because you are an employee whose insurance
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or premiums are paid with money that is neverWhat if you pay medical expenses of a de-sister-in-law, or included in your gross income, you cannot de-ceased spouse or dependent? If you paid duct the premiums paid with that money.e. Any other person (other than your medical expenses for your deceased spouse or
spouse) who lived with you all year as a dependent, include them as medical expensesLong-term care services. Contributionsmember of your household if your rela- on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whethermade by your employer to provide coverage fortionship does not violate local law, they are paid before or after the decedent’squalified long-term care services under a flexibledeath. The expenses can be included if thespending or similar arrangement must be in-2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali- person was your spouse or dependent either atcluded in your income. This amount will be re-fying Child earlier) of any other person forthe time the medical services were provided orported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.2005, and at the time you paid the expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).3. For whom you provided over half of the If you have medical expenses that are reim-support in 2005. But see Children of di- bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-vorced or separated parents, earlier and ment, you cannot include those expenses inWhat MedicalSupport claimed under a multiple support your medical expenses. This is because an HRAagreement, next. is funded solely by the employer.Expenses Are
Medicare A. If you are covered under socialSupport claimed under a multiple support Includible? security (or if you are a government employeeagreement. If you are considered to have pro- who paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled invided more than half of a qualifying relative’sUse Table 21-1 in this chapter as a guide toMedicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare Asupport under a multiple support agreement,determine which medical and dental expensesis not a medical expense. If you are not coveredyou can include medical expenses you pay foryou can include on Schedule A (Form 1040).under social security (or were not a governmentthat relative. A multiple support agreement isSee Publication 502 for information about otheremployee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-used when two or more people provide moreexpenses you can include. untarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation youthan half of a person’s support, but no one alone can include the premiums paid for Medicare Aprovides more than half. as a medical expense.Insurance PremiumsFor rules regarding what expenses you can
include this year, see What Expenses Can You Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplementalYou can include in medical expenses insuranceInclude This Year, earlier. medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi-premiums you pay for policies that cover medi-care B are a medical expense. If you applied forAny medical expenses paid by others whocal care. Policies can provide payment for:it at age 65 or after you became disabled, youjoined you in the agreement cannot be included
can include in medical expenses the monthlyas medical expenses by anyone. However, you• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc.,
premiums you paid. Check the information youcan include the entire unreimbursed amount you• Prescription drugs, received from the Social Security Administrationpaid for medical expenses.
to find out your premium.• Replacement of lost or damaged contact
Example. You and your three brothers each lenses, Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiumsprovide one-fourth of your mother’s total sup-• Membership in an association that gives you pay before you are age 65 for insurance forport. Under a multiple support agreement, youcooperative or so-called “free-choice” medical care for yourself, your spouse, or yourtreat your mother as your dependent. You paidmedical service, or group hospitalization dependents after you reach age 65 are medicalall of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim-and clinical care, or care expenses in the year paid if they are:bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses.
In figuring your medical expense deduction, you• Qualified long-term care insurance con-• Payable in equal yearly installments, or
can include only one-fourth of your mother’stracts (subject to additional limitations). more often, and
medical expenses. Your brothers cannot includeSee Qualified Long-term Care Insurance • Payable for at least 10 years, or until youany part of the expenses. However, if you andContracts in Publication 502. reach age 65 (but not for less than 5your brothers share the nonmedical support years).items and you separately pay all of your If you have a policy that provides more than
mother’s medical expenses without receiving one kind of payment, you can include the premi-
any reimbursement, you can include the amount ums for the medical care part of the policy if theUnused sick leave used to pay premiums.
you paid for her medical expenses in your medi- charge for the medical part is reasonable. The You must include in gross income cash pay-
cal expenses. cost of the medical part must be separately ments you receive at the time of retirement for
Page 136 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 139 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
unused sick leave. You also must include in by a patient who is traveling to get medical
gross income the value of unused sick leave care and is unable to travel alone, andHow Do You Treatthat, at your option, your employer applies to the• Transportation expenses for regular visitscost of your continuing participation in your Reimbursements?to see a mentally ill dependent, if theseemployer’s health plan after you retire. You canvisits are recommended as a part of treat-include this cost of continuing participation in the You can include in medical expenses only thosement.health plan as a medical expense. amounts paid during the taxable year for which
If you participate in a health plan where your you received no insurance or other reimburse-
employer automatically applies the value of un-Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocketment.
used sick leave to the cost of your continuingexpenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, when
participation in the health plan (and you do notyou use your car for medical reasons. You can-Insurance Reimbursementhave the option to receive cash), do not includenot include depreciation, insurance, general re-
the value of the unused sick leave in grosspair, or maintenance expenses. You must reduce your total medical expensesincome. You cannot include this cost of continu-If you do not want to use your actual ex-for the year by all reimbursements for medicaling participation in that health plan as a medicalpenses, for 2005 you can use a standard rate ofexpenses that you receive from insurance orexpense. 15 cents a mile for use of a car for medicalother sources during the year. This includes
reasons before September 1, 2005. The stan-payments from Medicare.
dard mileage rate allowed for use of a car whenMeals and Lodging Even if a policy provides reimbursement for
you use it for medical reasons after August 31,only certain specific medical expenses, you
You can include in medical expenses the cost of2005, is 22 cents a mile. must use amounts you receive from that policy
meals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu- to reduce your total medical expenses, including You can also include parking fees and tolls.tion if a principal reason for being there is to get those it does not provide reimbursement for.You can add these fees and tolls to your medicalmedical care. See Nursing home, later. expenses whether you use actual expenses orYou may be able to include in medical ex- Example. You have insurance policiesuse the standard mileage rate.penses the cost of lodging not provided in a which cover your hospital and doctors’ bills but
hospital or similar institution. You can include not your nursing bills. The insurance you receiveExample. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles forthe cost of such lodging while away from home if for the hospital and doctors’ bills is more thanmedical reasons during the year (2,200 milesall of the following requirements are met. their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-from January 1 through August 31 and 600 milestion, you must reduce the total amount you spentfrom September 1 through December 31). He• The lodging is primarily for and essential for medical care by the total amount of insurancespent $250 for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for tollsto medical care. you received even if the policies do not coverand parking. He wants to figure the amount he• The medical care is provided by a doctor some of your medical expenses.can include in medical expenses both ways toin a licensed hospital or in a medical caresee which gives him the greater deduction.Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).facility related to, or the equivalent of, aHe figures the actual expenses first. He addsA health reimbursement arrangement is anlicensed hospital. the $250 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 foremployer-funded plan that reimburses employ-• The lodging is not lavish or extravaganttolls and parking for a total of $305. ees for medical care expenses and allows un-under the circumstances. used amounts to be carried forward. An HRA isHe then figures the standard mileage
funded solely by the employer and the reim-amount. He multiplies the 2,200 miles by 15• There is no significant element of personal
bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi-cents a mile for a total of $330 and the 600 milespleasure, recreation, or vacation in the
mum dollar amount for a coverage period, areby 22 cents a mile for a total of $132. His stan-travel away from home.
not included in your income.dard mileage amount is $462 ($330 + $132). HeThe amount you include in medical expenses forthen adds the $50 tolls and parking for a total oflodging cannot be more than $50 for each night Other reimbursements. Generally, you do$512.for each person. You can include lodging for a not reduce medical expenses by payments youBill includes the $512 of car expenses withperson traveling with the person receiving the receive for:his other medical expenses for the year becausemedical care. For example, if a parent is travel- • Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem-the $512 is more than the $305 he figured usinging with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be ber or function of the body (loss of limb,actual expenses.included as a medical expense for lodging. sight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to theMeals are not included. extent the payment is based on the natureTransportation expenses you cannot in- of the injury without regard to the amountclude. You cannot include in medical ex-Nursing home. You can include in medical of time lost from work, orexpenses the cost of medical care in a nursing penses the cost of transportation expenses in
home, home for the aged, or similar institution, • Loss of earnings.the following situations.
for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.• Going to and from work, even if your con-This includes the cost of meals and lodging in You must, however, reduce your medical ex-dition requires an unusual means of trans-the home if a principal reason for being there is penses by any part of these payments that is
portation.to get medical care. designated for medical costs. See How Do You
Figure and Report the Deduction on Your TaxDo not include the cost of meals and lodging• Travel for purely personal reasons to an-
Return, later.if the reason for being in the home is personal.other city for an operation or other medical
For how to treat damages received for per-You can, however, include in medical expensescare.
sonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per-the part of the cost that is for medical or nursing• Travel that is merely for the general im-sonal Injuries, later.care. provement of one’s health. You do not have a medical deduction if you
are reimbursed for all of your medical expensesTransportation for the year.
Disabled DependentYou can include in medical expenses amounts Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-Care Expensespaid for transportation primarily for, and essen- bursed more than your medical expenses, youtial to, medical care. may have to include the excess in income. YouSome disabled dependent care expenses maymay want to use Figure 21-A to help you decidequalify as either:You can include: if any of your reimbursement is taxable.
• Medical expenses or• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu- Premiums paid by you. If you pay the en-
lance service, tire premium for your medical insurance or all of• Work-related expenses for purposes of
the costs of a plan similar to medical insurance,taking a credit for dependent care. (See• Transportation expenses of a parent who
you generally do not include an excess reim-chapter 32.)must go with a child who needs medical
bursement in your gross income.care, You can choose to apply them either way as
long as you do not use the same expenses to• Transportation expenses of a nurse or Premiums paid by you and your employer.
claim both a credit and a medical expense de-other person who can give injections, If both you and your employer contribute to your
duction.medications, or other treatment required medical insurance plan and your employer’s
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 137

Page 140 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What Tax Form Do You
Use?
You figure your medical expense deduction on
lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-
not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A or
Form 1040EZ. If you need more information on
itemized deductions or you are not sure if you
can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.
Enter the amount you paid for medical and
dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (Form
1040). This should be your expenses that were
not reimbursed by insurance or any other
sources.
You can deduct only the amount of your
medical and dental expenses that is more than
7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown on
line 38, Form 1040. For an example, see the
partial Schedule A, in this chapter.
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses
(Business or Medical)
If you are disabled, you can take a business
deduction for expenses that are necessary for
you to be able to work. If you take a business
deduction for these impairment-related work ex-
penses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limit
that applies to medical expenses.
You are disabled if you have:
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed, or
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-contributions are not included in your gross in- ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatcome, you must include in your gross incomeDamages for Personal substantially limits one or more of yourthe part of your excess reimbursement that is major life activities, such as performingfrom your employer’s contribution. Injuries manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-See Publication 502 to figure the amount of ing, learning, or working.the excess reimbursement you must include inIf you receive an amount in settlement of a
gross income. personal injury suit, part of that award may be forImpairment-related expenses defined.medical expenses that you deducted in an ear-Reimbursement in a later year.If you are Impairment-related expenses are those ordinarylier year. If it is, you must include that part in yourreimbursed in a later year for medical expenses and necessary business expenses that are:income in the year you receive it to the extent ityou deducted in an earlier year, you must reportreduced your taxable income in the earlier year.• Necessary for you to do your work satis-the reimbursement as income up to the amountSee Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussed factorily,you previously deducted as medical expenses.earlier.
• For goods and services not required orHowever, do not report as income the reim-Future medical expenses.If you receive an used, other than incidentally, in your per-bursement you received up to the amount ofamount in settlement of a damage suit for per-sonal activities, andyour medical deductions that did not reducesonal injuries, part of that award may be foryour tax for the earlier year. For more informa- • Not specifically covered under other in-future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-tion about the recovery of an amount that you come tax laws.duce any future medical expenses for theseclaimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierinjuries until the amount you received has beenyear, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries in completely used. Where to report. If you are self-employed,chapter 12.
deduct the business expenses on the appropri-
ate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to
report your business income and expenses.Medical expenses not deducted.If you did
not deduct a medical expense in the year you If you are an employee, complete FormHow Do You Figure
paid it because your medical expenses were not 2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form
more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income, 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business
and Report the
or because you did not itemize deductions, do Expenses. Enter on line 27, Schedule A (Form
not include the reimbursement up to the amount 1040) that part of the amount on line 10 of Form
Deduction on Your
of the expense in income. However, if the reim- 2106, or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ, that is related
bursement is more than the expense, see Ex- to your impairment. Enter the amount that is
Tax Return?
cess reimbursement, earlier. unrelated to your impairment on line 20, Sched-
Once you have determined which medical care ule A (Form 1040). Your impairment-related
Example. Last year, you had medical ex-expenses you can include, you figure and reportwork expenses are not subject to the
penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500the deduction on your tax return. 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
because it is less than 7.5% of your adjusted to other employee business expenses.
gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim-
bursed for any of the $500 in medical expenses, Example. You are blind. You must use a
you do not include that amount in your gross reader to do your work. You use the reader both
income. during your regular working hours at your place
Page 138 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 141 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,434
2,475
959
33,000
Bill and Helen Jones 0000000000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38
(99) /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A&B (Form 1040).
2005
of work and outside your regular working hours take this deduction to the extent that the amount If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form
away from your place of work. The reader’sof the deduction is more than your earned in-1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica-
services are only for your work. You can deductcome from that trade or business. tion 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de-
your expenses for the reader as business ex- duction.You cannot take this deduction for anypenses. month in which you were eligible to participate in
any subsidized health plan maintained by yourNote. When figuring the amount you may
employer or your spouse’s employer. This rule isdeduct for insurance premiums, do not includeapplied separately to plans that provide any advance payments shown in box 1 of FormHealth Insurance Costslong-term care insurance and plans that do not1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC)provide long-term care insurance. Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming thefor Self-Employed
If you qualify to take the deduction, use thehealth coverage tax credit, subtract the amountSelf-Employed Health Insurance DeductionPersons shown on line 4 of Form 8885 (reduced by anyWorksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-advance payments shown on line 6 of that form)ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of theIf you were self-employed and had a net profit from the total insurance premiums you paid.following applies, do not use the worksheet.for the year, were a general partner (or a limited
partner receiving guaranteed payments), or re-
• You had more than one source of incomeceived wages from an S corporation in which Where to report.You take this deduction onsubject to self-employment tax.you were a more than 2% shareholder (who is Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc-treated as a partner), you may be able to deduct,• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-tions and do not claim 100% of your self-em-as an adjustment to income, all of the amountcome, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earnedployed health insurance on line 29, include anypaid for medical and qualified long-term careIncome Exclusion. remaining premiums with all other medical careinsurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse,
expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject• You are using amounts paid for qualifiedand dependents.
to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 7 of Publicationlong-term care insurance to figure the de-The insurance plan must be established
535, Business Expenses, for more information.under your trade or business, and you cannot duction.
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 139

Page 142 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time What To Deduct
Homeowners
Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-
22. mated tax payments, or other tax payments asForm (and Instructions)
follows.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
Withheld taxes. You can deduct state andDeductions
Taxes local income taxes withheld from your salary in❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental the year they are withheld. For 2005, theseIncome and Loss taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your
Form W-2. You may also have state or local❏ Form 1116 Foreign Tax CreditReminder income tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14),
Form 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-R
Limit on itemized deductions.If your ad- (boxes 10 and 13).
justed gross income is more than $145,950 Estimated tax payments.You can deduct es-($72,975 if you are married filing separately), theTests To Deduct timated tax payments you made during the yearoverall amount of your itemized deductions may to a state or local government. However, yoube limited. See chapter 29 for more informationAny Tax must have a reasonable basis for making theabout this limit. estimated tax payments. Any estimated state orThe following two tests must be met for any taxlocal tax payments you make that are not rea-to be deductible by you. sonably determined in good faith at the time of
• The tax must be imposed on you. payment are not deductible. For example, youIntroduction made an estimated state income tax payment.• The tax must be paid during your tax year.However, the estimate of your state tax liabilityThis chapter discusses which taxes you can
shows that you will get a refund of the fulldeduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule AThe tax must be imposed on you.Generally, amount of your estimated payment. You had no(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes youyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed onreasonable basis to believe you had any addi-can deduct on other schedules or forms andyou. tional liability for state income taxes and youwhich taxes you cannot deduct. Generally, you can deduct property taxescannot deduct the estimated tax payment.This chapter covers: only if you are the property owner. If your spouseRefund applied to taxes.You can deduct any• Income taxes (state, local, and foreign),owns property and pays real estate taxes on it,part of a refund of prior-year state or local in-the taxes are deductible on your spouse’s sepa-• General sales taxes (state and local), come taxes that you chose to have credited torate return or on your joint return. your 2005 estimated state or local income taxes.• Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-
The tax must be paid during your tax year.  Do not reduce your deduction by either ofeign),
If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deductthe following items.• Personal property taxes (state and local),only those taxes actually paid during your tax• Any state or local income tax refund (orand year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day youcredit) you expect to receive for 2005.mail or deliver the check is the date of payment,• Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.
provided the check is honored by the financial• Any refund of (or credit for) prior year state
institution. If you use a pay-by-phone account,and local income taxes you actually re-Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine which
the date reported on the statement of the finan-ceived in 2005.taxes you can deduct.
cial institution showing when payment wasAt the end of the chapter is a section that However, part or all of this refund (or credit) maymade is the date of payment. If you contest a taxexplains which form you use to deduct the differ- be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state orliability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you canent types of taxes. local income taxes, later.deduct the tax only in the year it is actually paid.Business taxes. You can deduct certain If you use an accrual method of accounting,Separate federal returns.If you and yourtaxes only if they are ordinary and necessarysee Publication 538, Accounting Periods andspouse file separate state, local, and federalexpenses of your trade or business or of produc-Methods, for more information. income tax returns, you each can deduct on youring income. For information on these taxes, see
federal return only the amount of your own statePublication 535, Business Expenses.
and local income tax.State or local taxes.These are taxes im-
Joint state and local returns.If you andposed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, orIncome Taxes
your spouse file joint state and local returns andany of their political subdivisions (such as a
separate federal returns, each of you can deductcounty or city), or by the District of Columbia.This section discusses the deductibility of state
on your separate federal return part of the stateand local income taxes (including employeeIndian tribal government.An Indian tribal and local income taxes. You can deduct only thecontributions to state benefit funds) and foreigngovernment that is recognized by the Secretary amount of the total taxes that is proportionate toincome taxes.of the Treasury as performing substantial gov- your gross income compared to the combinedernment functions will be treated as a state for gross income of you and your spouse. However,this purpose. Income taxes, real estate taxes,State and Local Income you cannot deduct more than the amount youand personal property taxes imposed by that actually paid during the year. You can avoid thisTaxesIndian tribal government (or by any of its subdivi- calculation if you and your spouse are jointly andsions that are treated as political subdivisions of individually liable for the full amount of the stateYou can deduct state and local income taxes.a state) are deductible. and local income taxes. If so, you and yourYou can elect to deduct state and local general
spouse can deduct on your separate federalsales taxes instead of state and local incomeForeign taxes.These are taxes imposed by a
returns the amount you each actually paid.taxes.foreign country or any of its political subdivi-
sions. Joint federal return.If you file a joint federalException.  You cannot deduct state and local
return, you can deduct the total of the state andincome taxes you pay on income that is exempt
Useful Items local income taxes both of you paid.from federal income tax, unless the exempt in-
You may want to see: come is interest income. For example, you can-
not deduct the part of a state’s income tax that is
Publication on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt from
federal income tax.❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
Page 140 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 143 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contributions to state benefit funds.As an Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquent
taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyeremployee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-Real Estate Taxes must add them to the cost of the property. Thetions to state benefit funds that provide protec-
seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer.tion against loss of wages. Mandatory paymentsDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local,However, the seller must include them in theor foreign taxes on real property levied for themade to the following state benefit funds are selling price.general public welfare. You can deduct thesedeductible as state income taxes on Schedule A
taxes only if they are based on the assessedExamples. The following examples illus-(Form 1040), line 5.
value of the real property and charged uniformlytrate how real estate taxes are divided between
against all property under the jurisdiction of the• California Nonoccupational Disability Ben- buyer and seller.
taxing authority.efit Fund.
Deductible real estate taxes generally do notExample 1. Dennis and Beth White’s real• New Jersey Nonoccupational Disabilityinclude taxes charged for local benefits and im-property tax year for both their old home andBenefit Fund. provements that increase the value of the prop-their new home is the calendar year, with pay-
erty. They also do not include itemized chargesment due August 1. The tax on their old home,• New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-
for services (such as trash collection) to specificsold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newtion Fund. property or people, even if the charge is paid tohome, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-the taxing authority. For more information aboutBeth are considered to have paid a proportion-efit Fund. taxes and charges that are not deductible, seeate share of the real estate taxes on the old
Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct, home even though they did not actually pay• Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefitlater. them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,Fund. they can claim only a proportionate share of theTenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-• Washington State Supplemental Worker’s taxes they paid on their new property evening corporation.Generally, you can deductCompensation Fund. though they paid the entire amount.your share of the real estate taxes the corpora-Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-• West Virginia Unemployment Compensa- tion paid or incurred on the property. The corpo-ing the real property tax year for 127 days (Janu-tion Fund. ration should provide you with a statementary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). Theyshowing your share of the taxes. For more infor-figure their deduction for taxes on their old homemation, see Special Rules for Cooperatives inEmployee contributions to private or as follows.Publication 530.voluntary disability plans are not de-
Taxes On Old Homeductible.CAUTION
!
Buyers and sellers of real estate.If you
bought or sold real estate during the year, the1. Enter the total real estate taxes forreal estate taxes must be divided between thethe real property tax year..... $620buyer and the seller.Refund (or credit) of state or local incomeThe buyer and the seller must divide the real2. Enter the number of days in thetaxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for) real property tax year that youestate taxes according to the number of days instate or local income taxes in a year after the owned the property......... 1 2 6the real property tax year (the period to whichyear in which you paid them, you may have tothe tax imposed relates) that each owned the3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapinclude the refund in income on Form 1040, lineproperty. The seller is treated as paying theyears, divide line 2 by 366).... .34510, in the year you receive it. This includestaxes up to, but not including, the date of sale.4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isrefunds resulting from taxes that were The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin-your deduction. Enter it onning with the date of sale. This applies regard-overwithheld, applied from a prior year return, Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $214less of the lien dates under local law. Generally,not figured correctly, or figured again because of
this information is included on the settlementan amended return. If you did not itemize your
statement provided at the closing. Since the buyers of their old home paid all of thedeductions in the previous year, do not includeIf you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes untiltaxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 inthe refund in income. If you deducted the taxesthey are paid because you use the cash methodthe selling price of the old home. (The buyersin the previous year, include all or part of theof accounting, and the buyer of your property isadd the $214 to their cost of the home.)refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youpersonally liable for the tax, you are consideredDennis and Beth owned their new home dur-receive the refund. For a discussion of howto have paid your part of the tax at the time of theing the real property tax year for 243 days (Maymuch to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.sale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax to3 to December 31, including their date of
the date of sale even though you did not actuallypurchase). They figure their deduction for taxes
pay it. However, you must also include theon their new home as follows.Foreign Income Taxes
amount of that tax in the selling price of the
property. The buyer must include the same Taxes On New Home Generally, you can take either a deduction or a
amount in his or her cost of the property.credit for income taxes imposed on you by a 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forYou figure your deduction for taxes on eachforeign country or a U.S. possession. However, the real property tax year..... $732property bought or sold during the real propertyyou cannot take a deduction or credit for foreigntax year as follows. 2. Enter the number of days in theincome taxes paid on income that is exempt
real property tax year that youfrom U.S. tax under the foreign earned income owned the property......... 2 4 3exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. For
Worksheet 22-1. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapinformation on these exclusions, see Publication
years, divide line 2 by 366).... .66654, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident1. Enter the total real estate taxes for 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isAliens Abroad. For information on the foreign taxthe real property tax year..... your deduction. Enter it oncredit, see Publication 514. 2. Enter the number of days in the Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $488
real property tax year that you Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes onowned the property......... the new home, they add $244 ($732 paid less3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap $488 deduction) to their cost of the new home.General Sales Taxes years, divide line 2 by 366).... . (The sellers add this $244 to their selling price
and deduct the $244 as a real estate tax.)4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isYou can elect to deduct state and local generalyour deduction. Enter it on Dennis and Beth’s real estate tax deductionsales taxes, instead of state and local incomeSchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 for their old and new homes is the sum of $214taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A and $488, or $702. They will enter this amountNote. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you(Form 1040), line 5. Generally, you can use on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.bought or sold during the real property tax year.either your actual expenses or the state and
local sales tax tables to figure your state andReal estate taxes for prior years.Do not Example 2. George and Helen Brown
local general sales tax deduction. See the In-divide delinquent taxes between the buyer and bought a new home on May 3, 2005. Their real
structions for Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5, forseller if the taxes are for any real property tax property tax year for the new home is the calen-
details. year before the one in which the property is sold. dar year. Real estate taxes for 2004 were as-
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 141

Page 144 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1. Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds. State and local general sales taxes (if you choose to
One-half of self-employment tax paid. deduct state and local income taxes).
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes. State and local income taxes (if you choose to deduct
state and local general sales taxes).
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions).
Foreign real estate taxes. Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions).
Tenant’s share of real estate taxes paid by Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
cooperative housing corporation. Homeowners association charges.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Import duties.
Taxes
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business State and local sales and use taxes.
or of producing income. Federal excise taxes, such as telephone taxes
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty  (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot Deduct).
income. Per capita taxes.
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28.
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver’s licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
sessed in their state on January 1, 2005. TheForm 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- taxes. See Taxes and insurance in chapter 18
changes of real estate, the person responsible for more information.taxes became due on May 31, 2005, and Octo-
for closing the sale (generally the settlementber 31, 2005. Minister’s and military personnel housingagent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds FromThe Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after allowances. If you are a minister or a memberReal Estate Transactions, to report certain infor-the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2004 of the uniformed services and receive a housingmation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop-were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2005, allowance that you can exclude from income,erty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceedsand $340 on October 31, 2005. These taxes you still can deduct all of the real estate taxesof the sale and should include the portion of thewere for the 2004 real property tax year. The you pay on your home.seller’s real estate tax liability that the buyer willBrowns cannot deduct them since they did notpay after the date of sale. The buyer includesRefund (or rebate).If you receive a refund orown the property until 2005. Instead, they mustthese taxes in the cost basis of the property, andrebate in 2005 of real estate taxes you paid inadd $680 to the cost of their new home. the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid2005, you must reduce your deduction by theIn January 2006, the Browns receive theirand includes it in the sales price of the property.amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund2005 property tax statement for $752, whichFor a real estate transaction that involves aor rebate in 2005 of real estate taxes you de-they will pay in 2006. The Browns owned theirhome, any real estate tax the seller paid inducted in an earlier year, you generally mustnew home during the 2005 real property tax yearadvance but that is the liability of the buyerinclude the refund or rebate in income in thefor 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They willappears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer year you receive it. However, you only need tofigure their 2006 deduction for taxes as follows.deducts this amount as a real estate tax, and theinclude the amount of the deduction that re-seller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc-duced your tax in the earlier year. For more1. Enter the total real estate taxes for tion (or includes it in income) by the sameinformation, see Recoveries in chapter 12.the real property tax year..... $752 amount. See Refund (or rebate), later.
If you did not itemize deductions in the2. Enter the number of days in the
Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly year you paid the tax, do not reportreal property tax year that you
mortgage payment includes an amount placedowned the property......... 2 4 3 the refund as income.
TIP
in escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap estate taxes, you may not be able to deduct theyears, divide line 2 by 366).... .666 total amount placed in escrow. You can deductReal Estate-Related Items4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is only the real estate tax that the third party actu-your deduction. Claim it on You Cannot Deductally paid to the taxing authority. If the third partySchedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $501 does not notify you of the amount of real estate
Payments for the following items generally aretax that was paid for you, contact the third partyThe remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de- not deductible as real estate taxes.or the taxing authority to find the proper amountduction) of taxes paid in 2006, along with theto show on your return. • Taxes for local benefits.$680 paid in 2005, is added to the cost of their
new home. • Itemized charges for services (such asTenants by the entirety.If you and yourBecause the taxes up to the date of sale are trash and garbage pickup fees).spouse held property as tenants by the entiretyconsidered paid by the seller on the date of sale,and you file separate federal returns, each of• Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).the seller is entitled to a 2005 tax deduction ofyou can deduct only the taxes each of you paid
$931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2004 and • Rent increases due to higher real estateon the property.
the $251 for the 122 days the seller owned the taxes.
home in 2005. The seller must also include theDivorced individuals.If your divorce or sepa-• Homeowners’ association charges.$931 in the selling price when he or she figuresration agreement states that you must pay the
the gain or loss on the sale. The seller shouldreal estate taxes for a home owned by you and
contact the Browns in January 2006 to find outyour spouse, part of your payments may beTaxes for local benefits.Deductible real es-
how much real estate tax is due for 2005.deductible as alimony and part as real estatetate taxes generally do not include taxes
Page 142 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 145 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
charged for local benefits and improvements a tax surcharge because of increased real es-• Fines. You cannot deduct penalties for vi-
tending to increase the value of your property. olation of any law, including forfeiture oftate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as
These include assessments for streets, side- related collateral deposits.taxes.
walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking • Gift taxes.facilities, and similar improvements. You shouldHomeowners’ association charges. These
• License fees. You cannot deduct licenseincrease the basis of your property by thecharges are not deductible because they are
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-amount of the assessment. imposed by the homeowners’ association,
riage, driver’s, and dog license fees).Local benefit taxes are deductible only if theyrather than the state or local government.
are for maintenance, repair, or interest charges • Per capita taxes. You cannot deductrelated to those benefits. If only a part of the state or local per capita taxes.taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, you
• Social security. This includes social se-must be able to show the amount of that part to
Personal Property curity, Medicare, or railroad retirementclaim the deduction. If you cannot determine
taxes withheld from your pay.what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, or
Taxesinterest, none of it is deductible. • Social security and other employmentTaxes for local benefits may be included in taxes for household workers. However,Personal property tax is deductible if it is a stateyour real estate tax bill. If your taxing authority the social security and other employmentor local tax that is:(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copy taxes you pay on the wages of a house-of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You should• Charged on personal property, hold worker may qualify as medical oruse the rules above to determine if the local child care expenses. For more informa-• Based only on the value of the personalbenefit tax is deductible. tion, see chapters 21 and 32.property, andItemized charges for services. An itemized
• Charged on a yearly basis, even if it isMany taxes and fees other than those listedcharge for services to specific property or peo-
collected more or less than once a year.above are also nondeductible, unless they areple is not a tax, even if the charge is paid to the
ordinary and necessary expenses of a businesstaxing authority. For example, you cannot de-
A tax that meets the above requirements canor income producing activity. For other nonde-duct the charge as a real estate tax if it is:
be considered charged on personal propertyductible items, see Real Estate-Related Items• A unit fee for the delivery of a serviceeven if it is for the exercise of a privilege. ForYou Cannot Deduct, earlier.(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000example, a yearly tax based on value qualifiesgallons of water you use), as a personal property tax even if it is called a
registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-• A periodic charge for a residential service
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual Where To Deductways.fee charged to each homeowner for trash
collection), or If the tax is partly based on value and partlyYou deduct taxes on the following schedules.
based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.• A flat fee charged for a single service pro-
State and local income taxes. These taxesvided by your government (such as a $30Example. Your state charges a yearly mo-are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5,charge for mowing your lawn because ittor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50even if your only source of income is from busi-was allowed to grow higher than permittedcents per hundredweight. You paid $32 basedness, rents, or royalties. You must check box aunder your local ordinance). on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) ofon line 5. If you deduct these taxes, you cannotyour car. You can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as elect to deduct general sales taxes.You must look at your real estate taxa personal property tax because it is based on
bill to determine if any nondeductiblethe value. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 34), based General sales tax deduction. These taxesitemized charges, such as those juston the weight, is not deductible.CAUTION
!
are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5.listed, are included in the bill. If your taxing You must check box b on line 5. If you elect toauthority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish deduct these taxes, you cannot deduct state andyou a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. local income taxes.
Exception. Service charges used to main-Taxes and Fees
tain or improve services (such as trash collec- Foreign income taxes. Generally, income
tion or police and fire protection) are deductibleYou Cannot Deduct taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-
as real estate taxes if: session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-
Many federal, state, and local government taxestion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as a• The fees or charges are imposed at a likeare not deductible because they do not fall withincredit against your U.S. income tax on Formrate against all property in the taxing juris-the categories discussed earlier. Other taxes1040, line 47. To claim the credit, you may havediction, and fees, such as federal income taxes, are notto complete and attach Form 1116. For more
• The funds collected are not earmarked;deductible because the tax law specifically pro-information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in-
instead, they are commingled with generalhibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1.structions, or Publication 514.
revenue funds, and Taxes and fees that are generally not de-
Real estate taxes and personal propertyductible include the following items.• Funds used to maintain or improve serv-
taxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched-ices are not limited to or determined by the• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-ule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 7, unless they areamount of these fees or charges collected.sion taxes. However, you can deduct thepaid on property used in your business in whichestate tax attributable to income in respectcase they are deducted on Schedule C, Sched-of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary,Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).Transfer ule C-EZ, or Schedule F (Form 1040). Taxes onmust include that income in your grosstaxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale property that produces rent or royalty incomeincome. In that case, deduct the estate taxof a personal home are not deductible. If they are deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040).as a miscellaneous deduction that is notare paid by the seller, they are expenses of the
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-sale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofcome limit. For more information, see Pub-If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost your self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.lication 559.basis of the property.
• Federal income taxes. This includesRent increase due to higher real estate taxes. Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are
taxes withheld from your pay.If your landlord increases your rent in the form of deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 143

Page 146 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You must be legally liable for the loan.Late payment charge on mortgage payment.
You cannot deduct payments you make You can deduct as home mortgage interest a
for someone else if you are not legally late payment charge if it was not for a specific
23. liable to make them. Both you and the service performed in connection with your mort-
lender must intend that the loan be repaid. gage loan.
In addition, there must be a true
Mortgage prepayment penalty.If you pay offdebtor-creditor relationship between you
Interest your home mortgage early, you may have to payand the lender.
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home
• The mortgage must be a secured debt onmortgage interest provided the penalty is not forExpense a qualified home. (Generally, your mort-a specific service performed or cost incurred in
gage is a secured debt if you put yourconnection with your mortgage loan.
home up as collateral to protect the inter-
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canests of the lender. The term “qualifiedReminders deduct your home mortgage interest (subject tohome” means your main home or second
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-home. For details, see Publication 936.)Personal interest.Personal interest is not de- ing, the date of sale.ductible. Examples of personal interest include
interest on a loan to purchase an automobile for Example. John and Peggy Harris sold theirAmount Deductiblepersonal use and credit card and installment home on May 7. Through April 30, they madeinterest incurred for personal expenses. In most cases, you will be able to deduct all ofhome mortgage interest payments of $1,220.
But you may be able to deduct interest youyour home mortgage interest. Whether you canThe settlement sheet for the sale of the home
pay on a qualified student loan. For details, seededuct all of it depends on the date you took outshowed $50 interest for the 6-day period in May
Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.the mortgage, the amount of the mortgage, andup to, but not including, the date of sale. Their
your use of its proceeds. mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +Limit on itemized deductions. If your ad- $50).justed gross income is more than $145,950Fully deductible interest.If all of your mort-($72,975 if you are married filing separately), the Prepaid interest.If you pay interest in ad-gages fit into one or more of the following threeoverall amount of your itemized deductions may vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofcategories at all times during the year, you canbe limited. See chapter 29 for more information the tax year, you must spread this interest overdeduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (Ifabout this limit. the tax years to which it applies. You can deductany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
in each year only the interest that qualifies asgory, add the debt that fits in each category to
home mortgage interest for that year. However,your other debt in the same category.)
see Points, later.The three categories are:
Introduction Mortgage interest credit.You may be able to1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the claim a mortgage interest credit if you wereber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).amount you pay for the use of borrowed money. issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a
The types of interest you can deduct as item- state or local government. Figure the credit on2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) are: Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take1987, to buy, build, or improve your home
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-(called home acquisition debt), but only if• Home mortgage interest, including certain est deduction by the amount of the credit.throughout 2005 these mortgages plus anypoints, and For more information on the credit, see chap-grandfathered debt totaled $1 million or
• Investment interest. ter 37.less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-
arately).This chapter explains these deductions. It also Ministers’ and military housing allowance.
explains where to deduct other types of interest3. Mortgages you took out after October 13,If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
and lists some types of interest you cannot de-1987, other than to buy, build, or improveformed services and receive a housing allow-
duct. your home (called home equity debt), butance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your
only if throughout 2005 these mortgageshome mortgage interest.Use Table 23-1 to find out where to get moretotaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifinformation on various types of interest, includ- Mortgage assistance payments.If you qual-married filing separately) and totaled noing investment interest. ify for mortgage assistance payments formore than the fair market value of your
lower-income families under section 235 of thehome reduced by (1) and (2).
Useful Items National Housing Act, part or all of the interestThe dollar limits for the second and thirdYou may want to see: on your mortgage may be paid for you. Youcategories apply to the combined mortgages oncannot deduct the interest that is paid for you.your main home and second home.Publication No other effect on taxes.Do not includeSee Part II of Publication 936 for more de-❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction these mortgage assistance payments in yourtailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-
income. Also, do not use these payments tosition, and home equity debt.
reduce other deductions, such as real estateYou can use Figure 23-A to check whethertaxes.your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
Divorced or separated individuals.If a di-Home Mortgage
Limits on deduction.You cannot fully deductvorce or separation agreement requires you or
interest on a mortgage that does not fit into anyyour spouse or former spouse to pay homeInterest
of the three categories listed above. If this ap-mortgage interest on a home owned by both of
plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 toyou, the payment of interest may be alimony.Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-
figure the amount of interest you can deduct.See the discussion of Payments forest you pay on a loan secured by your home
jointly-owned home in chapter 18.(main home or a second home). The loan may
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second Redeemable ground rent. If you make an-Special Situationsmortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-You can deduct home mortgage interest onlyThis section describes certain items that can be able ground rent, you can deduct them asif you meet all the following conditions.included as home mortgage interest and others mortgage interest.
• You must file Form 1040 and itemize de- that cannot. It also describes certain special Payments made to end the lease and to buy
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). situations that may affect your deduction. the lessor’s entire interest in the land are not
Page 144 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 147 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 145

Page 148 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ground rents. You cannot deduct them. For 2. Paying points is an established business ($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaid
more information, see Publication 936. practice in the area where the loan was interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged for
made. services, in place of amounts that ordinarily areNonredeemable ground rents .Payments stated separately on the settlement statement.on a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort- 3. The points paid were not more than theBill paid the points out of his private funds, rathergage interest. You can deduct them as rent if points generally charged in that area.than out of the proceeds of the new loan. Thethey are a business expense or if they are for4. You use the cash method of accounting.payment of points is an established practice inrental property. This means you report income in the yearthe area, and the points charged are not more
you receive it and deduct expenses in thethan the amount generally charged there. Bill’sRental payments. If you live in a house beforeyear you pay them. (If you want more infor-first payment on the new loan was due July 1.final settlement on the purchase, any paymentsmation about this method, see Accounting He made six payments on the loan in 2005 andyou make for that period are rent and not inter-Methods in chapter 1.) is a cash basis taxpayer.est. This is true even if the settlement papers call Bill used the funds from the new mortgage tothem interest. You cannot deduct these pay-5. The points were not paid in place of repay his existing mortgage. Although the newments as home mortgage interest. amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-mortgage loan was for Bill’s continued owner-rately on the settlement statement, such asship of his main home, it was not for theMortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees,purchase or improvement of that home. He can-securities.You cannot deduct the home mort- attorney fees, and property taxes. not deduct all of the points in 2005. He cangage interest on grandfathered debt or home6. The funds you provided at or before clos-deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life ofequity debt if you used the proceeds of the ing, plus any points the seller paid, were atthe loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180mortgage to buy securities or certificates thatleast as much as the points charged. Themonths) × 6 payments] of the points in 2005.produce tax-free income. “Grandfathered debt”funds you provided do not have to haveThe other point ($1,000) was a fee for servicesand “home equity debt” are defined earlier underbeen applied to the points. They can in-and is not deductible.Amount Deductible. clude a down payment, an escrow deposit,
earnest money, and other funds you paidExample 2. The facts are the same as inRefunds of interest.If you receive a refund of
at or before closing for any purpose. YouExample 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of theinterest in the same tax year you paid it, you
cannot have borrowed these funds fromloan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000must reduce your interest expense by the
your lender or mortgage broker. to repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%amount refunded to you. If you receive a refund
($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points ($2,000) inof interest you deducted in an earlier year, you7. You use your loan to buy or build your2005. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 × 25%).generally must include the refund in income inmain home. Bill also deducts the ratable part of the re-the year you receive it. However, you need to
8. The points were computed as a percent-maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must beinclude it only up to the amount of the deduction
age of the principal amount of the mort-spread over the life of the loan. This is $50that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is
gage. [($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2005.true whether the interest overcharge was re-
The total amount Bill deducts in 2005 is $550funded to you or was used to reduce the out-9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-($500 + $50).standing principal on your mortgage. ment statement (such as the Settlement
If you received a refund of interest you over-Statement, Form HUD-1) as points Deduction allowed ratably.If you do not
paid in an earlier year, you generally will receivecharged for the mortgage. The points maymeet the tests above under Deduction allowed
a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, be shown as paid from either your funds orin year paid, the loan is not a home improvement
showing the refund in box 3. For informationthe seller’s. loan, or you choose not to deduct your points in
about Form 1098, see Mortgage Interest State- full in the year paid, you can deduct the points
ment, later. ratably (equally) over the life of the loan if youNote. If you meet all of these tests, you canFor more information on how to treat refunds meet all the following tests.choose to either fully deduct the points in theof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov- year paid, or deduct them over the life of the1. You use the cash method of accounting.eries in chapter 12. loan. This means you report income in the year
you receive it and deduct expenses in theHome improvement loan. You can alsoPoints year you pay them. Most individuals usefully deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan
this method.to improve your main home, if tests (1) throughThe term “points” is used to describe certain(6) are met. 2. Your loan is secured by a home. (Thecharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower
home does not need to be your mainto obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be Second home.  You cannot fully de-
home.)called loan origination fees, maximum loan duct in the year paid points you pay on
charges, loan discount, or discount points. loans secured by your second home.CAUTION
!
3. Your loan period is not more than 30
You can deduct these points only over the life ofA borrower is treated as paying any points years.
the loan.that a home seller pays for the borrower’s mort-
4. If your loan period is more than 10 years,gage. See Points paid by the seller, later.
the terms of your loan are the same asRefinancing. Generally, points you pay to
other loans offered in your area for therefinance a mortgage are not deductible in full inGeneral rule. You generally cannot deduct
same or longer period.the year you pay them. This is true even if thethe full amount of points in the year paid. Be-
new mortgage is secured by your main home.cause they are prepaid interest, you generally 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 or
deduct them ratably over the life (term) of theHowever, if you use part of the refinancedless, or the number of points is not more
mortgage. See Deduction allowed ratably, later.mortgage proceeds to improve your main home than:
and you meet the first six tests listed underFor exceptions to the general rule, see De-
Deduction allowed in year paid, earlier, you can a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less,duction allowed in year paid, next.
fully deduct the part of the points related to theor
improvement in the year you paid them with yourDeduction allowed in year paid.You can b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15own funds. You can deduct the rest of the pointsfully deduct points in the year paid if you meet all years.over the life of the loan.the following tests. (You can use Figure 23-B as
a quick guide to see whether your points are fully
Example 1. In 1992, Bill Fields got a mort-Original issue discount.If you do not qual-deductible in the year paid.) 
gage to buy a home. In 2005, Bill refinanced that ify to either deduct the points in the year paid or
1. Your loan is secured by your main home. mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage deduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or if
(Your main home is the one you live in loan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To you choose not to use either of these methods,
most of the time.) get the new loan, he had to pay three points the points reduce the issue price of the loan.
Page 146 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 149 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your new home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 147

Page 150 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This reduction results in original issue discount, year paid only the points that are generally showing the refund in box 3. See Refunds of
which is discussed in chapter 5 of Publication charged. You must spread any additional pointsinterest, earlier.
535. over the life of the mortgage.
Mortgage ending early.If you spread yourAmounts charged for services. Amounts
deduction for points over the life of the mort-charged by the lender for specific services con-
Investment Interestgage, you can deduct any remaining balance innected to the loan are not interest. Examples of
the year the mortgage ends. However, if youthese charges are:
This section discusses the interest expensesrefinance the mortgage with the same lender,• Appraisal fees, you may be able to deduct as an investor.you cannot deduct any remaining balance of
If you borrow money to buy property you holdspread points. Instead, deduct the remaining• Notary fees,
for investment, the interest you pay is invest-balance over the term of the new loan.• Preparation costs for the mortgage note or ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-deed of trust, est subject to the limit discussed later. However,ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.
you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-• Mortgage insurance premiums, and
duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deductExample. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1995• VA funding fees. interest expenses on straddles.that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of
the mortgage. He had deducted $2,000 of theseInvestment interest does not include anyYou cannot deduct these amounts as points
points through 2004. qualified home mortgage interest or any interesteither in the year paid or over the life of the
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2005. Hetaken into account in computing income or lossmortgage. For information about the tax treat-
can deduct the remaining $1,000 of points infrom a passive activity.ment of these amounts and other settlement
2005.fees and closing costs, get Publication 530, Tax
Information for First-Time Homeowners. Investment PropertyLimits on deduction.You cannot fully deduct
points on a mortgage unless the mortgage fitsPoints paid by the seller.The term “points” Property held for investment includes propertyinto one of the categories listed earlier underincludes loan placement fees that the seller that produces interest, dividends, annuities, orFully deductible interest. See Publication 936 forpays to the lender to arrange financing for the royalties not derived in the ordinary course of adetails.buyer. trade or business. It also includes property that
produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi-Treatment by seller.The seller cannot de-Mortgage Interest nary course of a trade or business) from the saleduct these fees as interest. They are a selling
or trade of property producing these types ofStatementexpense that reduces the amount realized by
income or held for investment (other than anthe seller. See chapter 15 for information on the
If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interestinterest in a passive activity). Investment prop-sale of your home.
(including certain points) during the year on anyerty also includes an interest in a trade or busi-
Treatment by buyer. The buyer reduces one mortgage, you generally will receive a Formness activity in which you did not materially
the basis of the home by the amount of the1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or a similarparticipate (other than a passive activity).
seller-paid points and treats the points as if he orstatement from the mortgage holder. You will
she had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.receive the statement if you pay interest to a
tion allowed in year paid, earlier, are met, the To determine your investment interest, combineperson (including a financial institution or a co-
buyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If your share of investment interest from a partner-operative housing corporation) in the course of
any of those tests is not met, the buyer deducts ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourthat person’s trade or business. A governmental
the points over the life of the loan. other investment interest.unit is a person for purposes of furnishing the
For information about basis, see chapter 13.statement.
The statement for each year should be sentFunds provided are less than points.If you Allocation of Interestto you by January 31 of the following year. Ameet all the tests in Deduction allowed in year Expensecopy of this form will also be sent to the IRS.paid, earlier, except that the funds you providedThe statement will show the total interest youwere less than the points charged to you (test 6), If you borrow money for business or personalpaid during the year. If you purchased a mainyou can deduct the points in the year paid, up to purposes as well as for investment, you musthome during the year, it will also show the de-the amount of funds you provided. In addition, allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyductible points paid during the year, includingyou can deduct any points paid by the seller. the interest expense on the part of the debt usedseller-paid points. However, it should not show
for investment purposes is treated as invest-any interest that was paid for you by a govern-Example 1. When you took out a $100,000 ment interest. The allocation is not affected byment agency.mortgage loan to buy your home in December, the use of property that secures the debt.As a general rule, Form 1098 will includeyou were charged one point ($1,000). You meetonly points that you can fully deduct in the yearall the tests for deducting points in the year paid,paid. However, certain points not included onLimit on Deductionexcept the only funds you provided were a $750Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in thedown payment. Of the $1,000 charged for year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points, Generally, your deduction for investment inter-points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.earlier, to determine whether you can deductest expense is limited to the amount of your netYou spread the remaining $250 over the life ofpoints not shown on Form 1098. investment income.the mortgage.
You can carry over to the next tax year thePrepaid interest on Form 1098.If you pre- amount of investment interest that you could notExample 2. The facts are the same as inpaid interest in 2005 that accrued in full by Janu-deduct because of this limit. The interest carriedExample 1, except that the person who sold youary 15, 2006, this prepaid interest may beover is treated as investment interest paid oryour home also paid one point ($1,000) to helpincluded in box 1 of Form 1098. However, youaccrued in that next year.you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you cancannot deduct the prepaid amount for January
You can carry over disallowed investmentdeduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were2006 in 2005. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.)
interest to the next tax year even if it is more thancharged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). YouYou will have to figure the interest that accrued
your taxable income in the year the interest wasspread the remaining $250 over the life of thefor 2006 and subtract it from the amount in box
paid or accrued.mortgage. You must reduce the basis of your1. You will include the interest for January 2006
home by the $1,000 paid by the seller. with the other interest you pay for 2006. See
How To Report, later.Excess points. If you meet all the tests in Net Investment Income
Deduction allowed in year paid, earlier, exceptRefunded interest.If you received a refund of
that the points paid were more than are gener- mortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier Determine the amount of your net investment
ally paid in your area (test 3), you deduct in the year, you generally will receive a Form 1098income by subtracting your investment ex-
Page 148 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 151 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penses (other than interest expense) from your on Form 8814, lines 1a and 2. Subtract the result• Personal interest (discussed later).investment income. from the amount on Form 8814, line 6.
• Service charges (however, see Other Ex-Child’s capital gain distributions.If partInvestment income. This generally includes penses in chapter 28).of the amount you report is your child’s capitalyour gross income from property held for invest- • Annual fees for credit cards.gain distributions, that part (which is reported onment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, andSchedule D, line 13 or Form 1040, line 13)royalties). Investment income does not include • Loan fees.generally does not count as investment income.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does • Credit investigation fees.However, you can choose to include all or part ofnot include qualified dividends or capital gainit in investment income, as explained in Choos-distributions unless you choose to include them. • FHA mortgage insurance premiums anding to include net capital gain, earlier. VA funding fees.Choosing to include qualified dividends. Your investment income also includes the
Investment income generally does not include • Interest to purchase or carry tax-exemptamount on Form 8814, line 6, (or, if applicable,
qualified dividends (discussed in chapter 8). securities.the amount figured under Child’s Alaska Perma-
However, you can choose to include all or part ofnent Fund dividends, earlier).
your qualified dividends in investment income. Penalties.You cannot deduct fines and pen-Investment expenses. Investment expensesYou make this choice by completing Form alties paid to a government for violations of law,include all income-producing expenses (other4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. regardless of their nature.than interest expense) relating to investmentIf you choose to include any amount of your
property that are allowable deductions after ap-qualified dividends in investment income, you
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneousPersonal Interestmust reduce your qualified dividends that are
itemized deductions. Use the smaller of:eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-the same amount. 1. The investment expenses included on terest is any interest that is not home mortgage
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, orChoosing to include net capital gain.In- interest, investment interest, business interest,
vestment income generally does not include net or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-2. The amount on Schedule A, line 26.capital gain from disposing of investment prop- lowing items.
erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
• Interest on car loans (unless you use theLosses from passive activities.Income ortual funds). However, you can choose to include
car for business).expenses that you used in computing income orall or part of your net capital gain in investment
loss from a passive activity are not included inincome. • Interest on federal, state, or local incomedetermining your investment income or invest-You make this choice by completing Form tax.ment expenses (including investment interest4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. • Finance charges on credit cards, retail in-expense). See Publication 925, Passive ActivityIf you choose to include any amount of your stallment contracts, and revolving chargeand At-Risk Rules, for information about passivenet capital gain in investment income, you must accounts incurred for personal expenses.activities.reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
• Late payment charges by a public utility.the lower capital gains tax rates by the same
amount. Form 4952
You may be able to deduct interestBefore making either choice, consider
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense you pay on a qualified student loan.the overall effect on your tax liability.
Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest- For details, see Publication 970.Compare your tax if you make one or
TIPTIP
ment interest.both of these choices with your tax if you do not.
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do notInvestment income of child reported on
have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourparent’s return.Investment income includes Allocation of Interestreturn if you meet all of the following tests.the part of your child’s interest and dividend
income that you choose to report on your return.• Your investment interest expense is notIf you use the proceeds of a loan for more thanIf the child does not have qualified dividends,more than your investment income fromone purpose (for example, personal and busi-Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, or capital interest and ordinary dividends minus anyness), you must allocate the interest on the loangain distributions, this is the amount on line 6 ofqualified dividends. to each use. However, you do not have to allo-Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-• You have no other deductible investmentInterest and Dividends. ble, regardless of how the funds are used.expenses.Child’s qualified dividends.If part of the You allocate interest (other than fully deduct-• You have no disallowed investment inter-amount you report is your child’s qualified divi- ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in theest expense from 2004.dends, that part (which is reported on line 9b of same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do
Form 1040 or Form 1040A) generally does not this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro-If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct allcount as investment income. However, you can ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to doof your investment interest.choose to include all or part of it in investment this, see chapter 5 of Publication 535.
income, as explained under Choosing to includeMore Informationqualified dividends, earlier.
Your investment income also includes theFor more information on investment interest,
amount on Form 8814, line 6, (or, if applicable,see Investment Expenses in chapter 3 of Publi-How To Reportthe amount figured next under Child’s Alaska cation 550.
Permanent Fund dividends). You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home
Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. mortgage interest or investment interest on your
If part of the amount you report is your child’s tax return. Where you deduct your interest ex-
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partItems You pense generally depends on how you use the
does not count as investment income. To figure loan proceeds. See Table 23-1 for a summary of
the amount of your child’s income that you canCannot Deduct where to deduct your interest expense.
consider your investment income, start with the
amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that Some interest payments are not deductible.Home mortgage interest and points.Deduct
amount by a percentage that is equal to the Certain expenses similar to interest also are not the home mortgage interest and points reported
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by deductible. Nondeductible expenses include the to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form
the total amount of interest and dividend income following items. 1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter-
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 149

Page 152 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
est to the financial institution than the amount number, an individual taxpayer identification year, attach a statement to your return explain-
shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti- ing this. Show how much of the interest each ofnumber (issued by the Internal Revenue Serv-
ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex- you paid, and give the name and address of theice), or an employer identification number. See
plaining the difference and print “See attached” person who received the form. Deduct yourSocial Security Number in chapter 1 for more
next to line 10. share of the interest on Schedule A (Forminformation about TINs. Deduct home mortgage interest that was not 1040), line 11, and print “See attached” next to
If you can take a deduction for points thatreported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule A the line.
were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct(Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage Similarly, if you are the payer of record on a
those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), lineinterest to the person from whom you bought mortgage on which there are other borrowers
your home, show that person’s name, address,12. entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on
and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on the the Form 1098 you received, deduct only yourMore than one borrower. If you and atdotted lines next to line 11. The seller must give share of the interest on Schedule A (Formleast one other person (other than your spouse ifyou this number and you must give the seller 1040), line 10. You should let each of the otheryou file a joint return) were liable for and paidyour TIN. A Form W-9 can be used for this borrowers know what his or her share is.interest on a mortgage that was for your home,purpose. Failure to meet any of these require-
Mortgage proceeds used for business orand the other person received a Form 1098ments may result in a $50 penalty for each
investment. If your home mortgage interestfailure. The TIN can be either a social security showing the interest that was paid during the
deduction is limited but all or part of the mort-
gage proceeds were used for business, invest-Table 23-1. Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense ment, or other deductible activities, see Table
23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of your
AND for more excess interest that is for those activities.
IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ...
Investment interest.Deduct investment in-Deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33 or Publication 970
terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub-Form 1040A, line 18
lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), lineDeductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 13.points reported on Form 1098 line 10
Amortization of bond premium. There areDeductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936
various ways to treat the premium you pay toreported on Form 1098 line 11
buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-Deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 zation in Publication 550.1098 line 12
Deductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550 Income-producing rental or royalty interest.
than interest incurred to produce rents or line 13 Deduct interest on a loan for income-producing
royalties) rental or royalty property that is not used in your
business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).Deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ Publication 535
(Form 1040) Example. You rent out part of your home
and borrow money to make repairs. You canDeductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535
deduct only the interest payment for the rentedDeductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deductrents or royalties the rest of the interest payment on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgagePersonal interest Not Deductible
interest.
Page 150 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 153 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($72,975 if you are married filing separately), themost qualified organizations. You may find Pub-
overall amount of your itemized deductions maylication 78 in your local library’s reference sec-
be limited. See chapter 29 for more informationtion, or on the internet at www.irs.gov. You can
about this limit. also call the IRS Tax Exempt/Government Enti-24.
ties Customer Service at 1-877-829-5500 to find
out if an organization is qualified.
Contributions Introduction Types of Qualified
This chapter explains how to claim a deductionOrganizations
for your charitable contributions. It discusses:
Generally, only the five following types of organi-What’s New for 2005 • Organizations that are qualified to receivezations can be qualified organizations.deductible charitable contributions,
Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. 1. A community chest, corporation, trust,• The types of contributions you can deduct,
This Act provides tax relief for persons affected fund, or foundation organized or created in
• How much you can deduct,by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be or under the laws of the United States, any
able to: state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-• What records to keep, and
session of the United States (including
• How to report your charitable contribu-• Use a higher standard mileage rate, Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-
tions. erated only for one or more of the following• Exclude mileage reimbursements from in-
purposes.come, and A charitable contribution is a donation or gift
a. Religious.to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It is• Claim a deduction in excess of the usual
voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-limits shown in Limits on Deductions in b. Charitable.ing to get, anything of equal value.this chapter.
c. Educational.Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitableSee Publication 4492.
d. Scientific.contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item-
Contributions of cars, boats, and airplanes.ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of e. Literary.If you donate a car, boat, or airplane to a quali-your deduction may be limited if certain rules
fied organization after 2004, your deduction f. The prevention of cruelty to children orand limits explained in this chapter apply to you.
generally is limited to the gross proceeds from animals.
its sale by the organization. This rule applies ifUseful Items Certain organizations that foster nationalthe claimed value of the donated vehicle is moreYou may want to see: or international amateur sports competitionthan $500. also qualify.For exceptions and more information, seePublication 2. War veterans’ organizations, includingCars, Boats and Airplanes under Contributions
❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or-of Property.
ganized in the United States or any of its❏ 526 Charitable Contributions possessions.
❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated 3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, andProperty associations operating under the lodge sys-Reminders tem.Form (and Instructions) Note. Your contribution to this type ofDisaster relief.You can deduct contributions❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized organization is deductible only if it is to beearmarked for flood relief, hurricane relief, or Deductions used solely for charitable, religious, scien-other disaster relief to a qualified organization tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions(defined later under Organizations That Qualify the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-To Receive Deductible Contributions). How- mals. ever, you cannot deduct contributions
4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies orearmarked for relief of a particular individual or
corporations.family. Organizations That Note. Your contribution to this type of
Written acknowledgment required.You can organization is not deductible if it can be
Qualify To Receiveclaim a deduction for a contribution of $250 or used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-
more only if you have a written acknowledgment leum crypt. 
Deductibleof your contribution from the qualified organiza- 5. The United States or any state, the Districttion or if you have certain payroll deduction rec- of Columbia, a U.S. possession (includingContributionsords. For more information, see Records To Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of aKeep, later in this chapter. state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribalYou can deduct your contributions only if you
government or any of its subdivisions thatPayment partly for goods or services.A make them to a qualified organization. To be-
perform substantial government functions.qualified organization must give you a writtencome a qualified organization, most organiza-
Note. To be deductible, your contributionstatement if you make a payment that is moretions other than churches and governments, as
to this type of organization must be madethan $75 and is partly a contribution and partlydescribed below, must apply to the IRS.
solely for public purposes. for goods or services. The statement must tell You can ask any organizationyou that you can deduct only the amount of your whether it is a qualified organization,payment that is more than the value of the goods and most will be able to tell you. Or
TIP
or services you received. It must also give you ayou can check IRS Publication 78, which listsgood faith estimate of the value of those goods
or services. See Contributions From Which You
Benefit, later in this chapter, for more informa-
tion.
Limit on itemized deductions.If your ad-
justed gross income is more than $145,950
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 151

Page 154 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limitsTable 24-1. Examples of Charitable Contributions—A Quick Check
may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later.
Use the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. SeeTable 24-1 lists some examples of contribu-
the rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.tions you can deduct and some that you cannot
deduct.Deductible As Not Deductible
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions
Contributions From
Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to:
Which You Benefit• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs,
mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of If you receive a benefit as a result of making aorganizations commerce contribution to a qualified organization, you can
• Federal, state, and local governments, if• Foreign organizations (except certaindeduct only the amount of your contribution that
your contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican is more than the value of the benefit you receive.
purposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) If you pay more than fair market value to athe public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profitqualified organization for merchandise, goods,
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals • Groups whose purpose is to lobby foror services, the amount you pay that is more
• Public parks and recreation facilities (but law changes than the value of the item can be a charitable
not entry or usage fees) • Homeowners’ associations contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,
• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-• Individuals
Goodwill Industries, United Way, Boy ble contribution.• Political groups or candidates for
Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls public office
Clubs of America, etc. Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to a
dinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds of• War veterans groups
the function go to the church. The ticket to theCosts you pay for a student living with you, Noncharitable payments to federal, state,dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.sponsored by a qualified organization and local governments When you buy your ticket, you know that its
value is less than your payment. To figure the
amount of your charitable contribution, you sub-
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
tract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)qualified organization as a volunteer
from your total payment ($65). You can deduct
Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs,$40 as a contribution to the church.
lodges, fraternal orders, or similar
groups Example 2. At a fund-raising auction con-
ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week’sTuition stay at a beach house. The amount you pay is
no more than the fair rental value. You have not
Value of your time or services
made a deductible charitable contribution.Value of blood given to a blood bank
Athletic events.If you make a payment to, or
for the benefit of, a college or university and, asExamples.   Qualified organizations include:Certain foreign charitable organizations.a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to anUnder income tax treaties with Canada, Israel,athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-• Churches, a convention or association ofand Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu-lege or university, you can deduct 80% of thechurches, temples, synagogues, tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexicanpayment as a charitable contribution.mosques, and other religious organiza-charitable organizations. Generally, you mustIf any part of your payment is for ticketstions. have income from sources in that country. For(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part isadditional information on the deduction of contri-• Most nonprofit charitable organizations not deductible. In that case, subtract the price ofbutions to Canadian charities, see Publicationsuch as the Red Cross and the United the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re-597, Information on the United States–CanadaWay. maining amount is a charitable contribution.Income Tax Treaty. If you need more informa-• Most nonprofit educational organizations,tion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi-Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-including the Boy and Girl Scouts of can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526.bership in an athletic scholarship program main-America, colleges, museums, and
tained by a university (a qualified organization).day-care centers if substantially all the
The only benefit of membership is that you havechild care provided is to enable individuals
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a(the parents) to be gainfully employed and
designated area of the stadium at thethe services are available to the generalContributions
university’s home football games. You can de-public. However, if your contribution is a
duct $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contri-substitute for tuition or other enrollmentYou Can Deduct
bution.fee, it is not deductible as a charitable
contribution, as explained later under Con- Generally, you can deduct your contributions of
tributions You Cannot Deduct. money or property that you make to, or for theExample 2. The facts are the same as in
use of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri-Example 1 except that your $300 payment in-• Nonprofit hospitals and medical researchbution is “for the use of” a qualified organizationcluded the purchase of one season ticket for theorganizations. when it is held in a legally enforceable trust forstated ticket price of $120. You must subtract• Utility company emergency energy pro-the qualified organization or in a similar legalthe usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300grams, if the utility company is an agentarrangement. payment. The result is $180. Your deductiblefor a charitable organization that assistsIf you give property to a qualified organiza-charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).individuals with emergency energy needs.tion, you generally can deduct the fair market
value of the property at the time of the contribu-Charity benefit events.If you pay a qualified• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies.
tion. See Contributions of Property, later in thisorganization more than fair market value for the• Public parks and recreation facilities (butchapter. right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,not entry or usage fees). sporting event, or other benefit event, you canYour deduction for charitable contributions is
deduct only the amount that is more than the• Civil defense organizations. generally limited to 50% of your adjusted gross
Page 152 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 155 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24-2. Volunteers’ Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $6 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $36 a week for my time?
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don’t want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse’s aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
value of the privileges or other benefits you Exception. An organization will not have to
1. Any rights or privileges, other than thosegive you this statement if one of the following isreceive.
discussed under Athletic events, earlier, true.If there is an established charge for thethat you can use frequently while you are aevent, that charge is the value of your benefit. If 1. The organization is:member, such as:
there is no established charge, your contribution
a. The type of organization described ina. Free or discounted admission to theis that part of your payment that is more than the
(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza-organization’s facilities or events,reasonable value of the right to attend the event.
tions, earlier, orWhether you use the tickets or other privilegesb. Free or discounted parking,has no effect on the amount you can deduct. b. Formed only for religious purposes, andc. Preferred access to goods or services,However, if you return the ticket to the qualified the only benefit you receive is an intan-andorganization for resale, you can deduct the en- gible religious benefit (such as admis-
tire amount you paid for the ticket. sion to a religious ceremony) thatd. Discounts on the purchase of goods
generally is not sold in commercialand services.Even if the ticket or other evidence of transactions outside the donative con-payment indicates that the payment is text.2. Admission, while you are a member, toa “contribution,” this does not meanCAUTION
!
events that are open only to members ofyou can deduct the entire amount. If the ticket 2. You receive only items whose value is notthe organization, if the organization rea-shows the price of admission and the amount of substantial. See Token items, earlier.sonably projects that the cost per personthe contribution, you can deduct the contribution(excluding any allocated overhead) is not3. You receive only membership benefits thatamount. more than $8.30. can be disregarded, as described earlier.
Example. You pay $40 to see a special
showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualifiedToken items. You can deduct your entire pay-
Expenses Paid for Studentorganization. Printed on the ticket is “Contribu-ment to a qualified organization as a charitable
tion—$40.” If the regular price for the movie is contribution if both of the following are true.Living With You
$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 • You get a small item or other benefit ofregular price). You may be able to deduct some expenses oftoken value. having a student live with you. You can deduct
qualifying expenses for a foreign or American• The qualified organization correctly deter-Membership fees or dues.You may be able student who:mines that the value of the item or benefitto deduct membership fees or dues you pay to ayou received is not substantial and informsqualified organization. However, you can deduct 1. Lives in your home under a written agree-you that you can deduct your payment inonly the amount that is more than the value of ment between you and a qualified organi-full.
the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct zation as part of a program of the
organization to provide educational oppor-dues, fees, or assessments paid to country
Written statement.A qualified organization tunities for the student,clubs and other social organizations. They are
must give you a written statement if you make anot qualified organizations. 2. Is not your relative or dependent, andpayment to it that is more than $75 and is partly
Certain membership benefits can be disre-a contribution and partly for goods or services.3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or any
garded. Both you and the organization canThe statement must tell you that you can deductlower grade at a school in the United
disregard certain membership benefits you getonly the amount of your payment that is moreStates.
in return for an annual payment of $75 or less tothan the value of the goods or services you
the qualified organization. You can pay morereceived. It must also give you a good faith You can deduct up to $50 a month for
estimate of the value of those goods or services.than $75 to the organization if the organization each full calendar month the student
does not require a larger payment for you to getThe organization can give you the statement lives with you. Any month when condi-
TIP
the benefits. The following benefits are coveredeither when it solicits or when it receives thetions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 days
under this rule. payment from you. or more counts as a full month.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 153

Page 156 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For additional information, see Expenses Example.  You cared for a foster child be- you cannot claim the cost of your evening at the
Paid for Student Living With You in Publication cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit thetheater.
526. agency that placed her in your home. Your un- Daily allowance (per diem).If you providereimbursed expenses are not deductible asservices for a charitable organization and re-Mutual exchange program. You cannot de- charitable contributions. ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonableduct the costs of a foreign student living in your travel expenses, including meals and lodgingCar expenses. You can deduct unreimbursedhome under a mutual exchange program out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas while away from home overnight, you must in-through which your child will live with a family inand oil, that are directly related to the use of yourclude in income the amount of the allowancea foreign country. car in giving services to a charitable organiza-that is more than your deductible travel ex-
tion. You cannot deduct general repair andpenses. You can deduct your necessary travel
Out-of-Pocket Expenses inmaintenance expenses, depreciation, registra-expenses that are more than the allowance.
tion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance.Giving Services Deductible travel expenses. These in-  If you do not want to deduct your actualclude:expenses, you can use a standard mileage rateYou may be able to deduct some amounts you
of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.pay in giving services to a qualified organization. • Air, rail, and bus transportation,
You can deduct parking fees and tollsThe amounts must be: • Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,whether you use your actual expenses or the
• Unreimbursed, standard mileage rate. • Taxi fares or other costs of transportation
You must keep reliable written records of between the airport or station and your• Directly connected with the services,your car expenses. For more information, seehotel,• Expenses you had only because of the Car expenses under Records To Keep, later.
• Lodging costs, andservices you gave, and
Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable• The cost of meals.• Not personal, living, or family expenses.contribution deduction for travel expenses nec-
essarily incurred while you are away from homeBecause these travel expenses are notTable 24-2 contains questions and answersperforming services for a charitable organizationbusiness-related, they are not subject to thethat apply to some individuals who volunteeronly if there is no significant element of personalsame limits as business-related expenses. Fortheir services. pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel.information on business travel expenses, see
This applies whether you pay the expenses di-Travel Expenses in chapter 26.Conventions. If you are a chosen representa-rectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses
tive attending a convention of a qualified organi-indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
zation, you can deduct actual unreimbursedble organization and the organization pays for
expenses for travel and transportation, includingyour travel expenses.
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging, ContributionsThe deduction for travel expenses will not be
while away from home overnight in connectiondenied simply because you enjoy providing
with the convention. However, see Travel, later. You Cannot Deductservices to the charitable organization. Even if
You cannot deduct personal expenses foryou enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable
There are some contributions you cannot de-sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, orcontribution deduction for your travel expenses
duct, such as those made to specific individualsnightclubs. You also cannot deduct travel, mealsif you are on duty in a genuine and substantial
and those made to nonqualified organizations.and lodging, and other expenses for your sense throughout the trip. However, if you have
(See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu-spouse or children. only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of
tions to Nonqualified Organizations, next).the trip you do not have any duties, you cannot You cannot deduct your expenses in attend-
There are others you can deduct only part of, asdeduct your travel expenses.ing a church convention if you go only as a
discussed later under Contributions From Whichmember of your church rather than as a chosen
You Benefit.Example 1. You are a troop leader for arepresentative. You can deduct unreimbursed
tax-exempt youth group and you help take theexpenses that are directly connected with giving
group on a camping trip. You are responsible forservices for your church during the convention. Contributions to
overseeing the setup of the camp and for provid-
IndividualsUniforms. You can deduct the cost and up-ing adult supervision for other activities during
keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every-the entire trip. You participate in the activities ofYou cannot deduct contributions to specific indi-day use and that you must wear while the group and really enjoy your time with them.viduals, including the following:performing donated services for a charitable or-You oversee the breaking of camp and you help
ganization. transport the group home. You can deduct your• Contributions to fraternal societies made
travel expenses. for the purpose of paying medical or burialFoster parents.You may be able to deduct as expenses of deceased members.a charitable contribution some of the costs ofExample 2. You sail from one island to an-
• Contributions to individuals who are needybeing a foster parent (foster care provider) if youother and spend 8 hours a day counting whales
or worthy. This includes contributions to ahave no profit motive in providing the foster careand other forms of marine life. The project is
qualified organization if you indicate thatand are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualifiedsponsored by a charitable organization. In most
your contribution is for a specific person.organization must designate the individuals youcircumstances, you cannot deduct your ex-
But you can deduct a contribution that youtake into your home for foster care. penses.
give to a qualified organization that in turnYou can deduct expenses that meet both of
helps needy or worthy individuals if you doExample 3. You work for several hoursthe following requirements.
not indicate that your contribution is for aeach morning on an archaeological dig spon-
specific person.1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex- sored by a charitable organization. The rest of
penses to feed, clothe, and care for the the day is free for recreation and sightseeing.• Payments to a member of the clergy that
foster child. You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc- can be spent as he or she wishes, such as
tion even though you work very hard during for personal expenses.2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali-those few hours.fied organization. • Expenses you paid for another person who
provided services to a qualified organiza-Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-Example 4. You spend the entire day at-
tion.duct as charitable contributions may be consid-tending a charitable organization’s regional
Example. Your son does missionary work.ered support provided by you in determining meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-
You pay his expenses. You cannot claim awhether you can claim the foster child as a ning you go to the theater. You can claim your
deduction for your son’s unreimbursed ex-dependent. For details, see chapter 3. travel expenses as charitable contributions, but
Page 154 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 157 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
penses related to his contribution of serv- contribution depends on the type or size of property has increased in value, you may have
ices. apartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- to make some adjustments to the amount of
table contribution. your deduction. See Giving Property That Has• Payments to a hospital that are for serv- Increased in Value, later.ices for a specific patient. You cannot de-• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You
For information about the records you mustduct these payments even if the hospital is cannot deduct as a charitable contribution
keep and the information you must furnish withoperated by a city, a state, or other quali- amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery
your return if you donate property, see Recordsfied organization. tickets or to play bingo or other games of
To Keep and How To Report, later.chance. For information on how to report
gambling winnings and losses, see chap-
Contributions to ters 12 and 28. Cars, boats, and airplanes.The following
rules apply to any donation of a car to a qualifiedNonqualified • Dues to fraternal orders and similar organization after December 31, 2004. Thesegroups. However, see Membership fees orOrganizations rules also apply to any donation of a boat, air-dues, earlier, under Contributions You plane, or any motor vehicle manufacturedCan Deduct.You cannot deduct contributions to organiza- mainly for use on public streets, roads, and
tions that are not qualified to receive tax-deduct-• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui-highways.
ible contributions, including the following.tion, even if you pay them for children toDeduction more than $500.If the qualifiedattend parochial schools or qualifying non-organization sells the car and you claim a de-1. Certain state bar associations if: profit day-care centers. You also cannotduction of more than $500, the following rulesdeduct any fixed amount you may be re-apply.a. The state bar is not a political subdivi-quired to pay in addition to the tuition fee
sion of a state, to enroll in a private school, even if it is1. You can deduct the smaller of:designated as a “donation.”b. The bar has private, as well as public,
purposes, such as promoting the pro- a. The gross proceeds from the sale of the
fessional interests of members, and car by the organization, or
Value of Time or Services
c. Your contribution is unrestricted and b. The car’s fair market value on the date
can be used for private purposes. of the contribution. If the car’s fair mar-You cannot deduct the value of your time or
ket value was more than your cost orservices, including:
2. Chambers of commerce and other busi- other basis, you may have to reduce
• Blood donations to the Red Cross or toness leagues or organizations (but see the fair market value to get the deducti-
blood banks, andchapter 28). ble amount, as described under Giving
Property That Has Increased in Value in• The value of income lost while you work3. Civic leagues and associations. Publication 526.as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-4. Communist organizations. ganization.
2. You must attach to your return the copy of5. Country clubs and other social clubs. the Form 1098-C, Contributions of Motor
6. Foreign organizations other than: Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or otherPersonal Expenses
statement containing the same informationa. A U.S. organization that transfers funds as Form 1098-C) you received from theYou cannot deduct personal, living, or familyto a charitable foreign organization if organization. The Form 1098-C (or otherexpenses, such as:the U.S. organization controls the use statement) will show the gross proceedsof the funds or if the foreign organiza-• The cost of meals you eat while you per-from the sale of the car.tion is only an administrative arm of theform services for a qualified organization
However, different rules apply if exception 1 orU.S. organization, or unless it is necessary for you to be away
exception 2 (described next) applies.from home overnight while performing theb. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican services, or If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or othercharitable organizations. See Certain statement), you cannot deduct your contribu-foreign charitable organizations under • Adoption expenses, including fees paid totion.Organizations That Qualify To Receive an adoption agency and the costs of keep-
You must get Form 1098-C (or other state-Deductible Contributions, earlier. ing a child in your home before adoption is
ment) within 30 days of the sale of the car.final (but see Adoption Credit in chapter 37,
However, if you donated the car before Septem-7. Homeowners’ associations. and the instructions for Form 8839, Quali-
ber 2, 2005, you must get Form 1098-C (or otherfied Adoption Expenses).8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28). statement) within 30 days of the sale of the carYou also may be able to claim an exemp-or, if later, October 1, 2005.9. Political organizations and candidates. tion for the child. See Adopted child in
chapter 3. Exception 1—vehicle used or improved by
organization. If the qualified organizationContributions From makes a significant intervening use of or mate-
Appraisal FeesWhich You Benefit rial improvement to the car before transferring it
and you claim a deduction of more than $500,
Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofIf you receive or expect to receive a financial or the following rules apply.
donated property are not deductible as contribu-economic benefit as a result of making a contri-
tions (but see chapter 28). • You generally can deduct the car’s fairbution to a qualified organization, you cannot
market value at the time of the contribu-deduct the part of the contribution that repre-
tion. But if the car’s fair market value wassents the value of the benefit you receive. These
more than your cost or other basis, youcontributions include the following.
may have to reduce the fair market valueContributions• Contributions for lobbying. This includes to get the deductible amount, as described
amounts that you earmark for use in, or in under Giving Property That Has Increasedof Propertyconnection with, influencing specific legis- in Value in Publication 526.
lation. If you contribute property to a qualified organiza-• You must attach to your return a copy of
• Contributions to a retirement home that tion, the amount of your charitable contribution Form 1098-C (or other statement contain-
are clearly for room, board, maintenance, is generally the fair market value of the property ing the same information as Form
or admittance. Also, if the amount of your at the time of the contribution. However, if the 1098-C).
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 155

Page 158 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The Form 1098-C (or other statement) will show edging your donation. The statement must considered an appraisal of any specific donated
whether the qualified organization makes a sig- contain the information and meet the tests property. But they do provide clues for making
nificant intervening use of or material improve- for an acknowledgement described under an appraisal and suggest relative prices for
ment to the car. Deductions of At Least $250 But Not Morecomparison with current sales and offerings in
Than $500 under Records To Keep, later. your area.If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other
statement), you cannot deduct your contribu- Example. You donate a used car in poorPartial interest in property.Generally, yoution. condition to a local high school for use by stu-cannot deduct a charitable contribution (notYou must get Form 1098-C (or other state- dents studying car repair. A used car guidemade by a transfer in trust) of less than yourment) within 30 days of your donation. However, shows the dealer retail value for this type of carentire interest in property.if you donated the car before September 2, in poor condition is $1,600. However, the guide2005, you have until October 1, 2005, to getRight to use property.A contribution of theshows the price for a private party sale of the carForm 1098-C (or other statement). right to use property is a contribution of less thanis only $750. The fair market value of the car is
your entire interest in that property and is notconsidered to be $750.Exception 2—vehicle given or sold to deductible. For exceptions and more informa-needy individual.If the qualified organizationtion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in TrustLarge quantities.If you contribute a largewill give the car, or sell it for a price well belowin Publication 561. number of the same item, fair market value is thefair market value, to a needy individual to further price at which comparable numbers of the itemthe organization’s charitable purpose, and youFuture interests in tangible personal are being sold.claim a deduction of more than $500, the follow-property. You can deduct the value of a chari-
ing rules apply. table contribution of a future interest in tangible
Giving Property Thatpersonal property only after all intervening inter-• You generally can deduct the car’s fairests in and rights to the actual possession orHas Decreased in Valuemarket value at the time of the contribu-enjoyment of the property have either expired ortion. But if the car’s fair market value wasbeen turned over to someone other than your-If you contribute property with a fair market valuemore than your cost or other basis, youself, a related person, or a related organization.that is less than your basis in it, your deduction ismay have to reduce the fair market value
limited to its fair market value. You cannot claimto get the deductible amount, as describedFuture interest.This is any interest that isa deduction for the difference between theunder Giving Property That Has Increasedto begin at some future time, regardless ofproperty’s basis and its fair market value.in Value in Publication 526. whether it is designated as a future interest
under state law.• You must attach to your return a copy of
Giving Property ThatForm 1098-C (or other statement contain-
ing the same information as Form
Determining Has Increased in Value
1098-C). Fair Market Value If you contribute property with a fair market valueThe Form 1098-C (or other statement) will show that is more than your basis in it, you may haveThis section discusses general guidelines forwhether this exception applies. to reduce the fair market value by the amount ofdetermining the fair market value of variousIf you do not attach Form 1098-C (or other appreciation (increase in value) when you figuretypes of donated property.statement), you cannot deduct your contribu- your deduction.Fair market value is the price at which prop-tion. Your basis in property is generally what youerty would change hands between a willingpaid for it. See chapter 13 if you need moreYou must get Form 1098-C (or other state-buyer and a willing seller, neither having to buyinformation about basis.ment) within 30 days of your donation. However,or sell, and both having reasonable knowledgeDifferent rules apply to figuring your deduc-if you donated the car before September 2,of all the relevant facts. Publication 561 containstion, depending on whether the property is:2005, you have until October 1, 2005, to geta more complete discussion.
Form 1098-C (or other statement). 1. Ordinary income property, orUsed clothing and household goods.Gen-
erally, the fair market value of used clothing andExample. Anita donates a used car to a 2. Capital gain property.
household goods is far less than its original cost.qualified organization. A used car guide shows
For used clothing, you should claim as thethe fair market value for this type of car is Ordinary income property.Property is ordi-value the price that buyers of used items actually$6,000. However, Anita gets a Form 1098-C nary income property if its sale at fair marketpay in used clothing stores, such as consign-from the organization showing the car was sold value on the date it was contributed would havement or thrift shops. See Household Goods infor $900. Neither exception 1 nor exception 2 resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-Publication 561 for information on the valuationapplies. If Anita itemizes her deductions, she tal gain. Examples of ordinary income propertyof household goods, such as furniture, appli-can deduct $900 for her donation. She must are inventory, works of art created by the donor,ances, and linens.attach the Form 1098-C to her return. manuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital
assets held 1 year or less.Deduction $500 or less.If the qualified or-Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to aganization sells the car for $500 or less and Amount of deduction. The amount youthrift store operated by her church. She paidexceptions 1 and 2 (described earlier) do not can deduct for a contribution of ordinary income$300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats inapply, the following rules apply. property is its fair market value minus thethe thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value
amount that would be ordinary income orof the coat is reasonably determined to be $50.1. You can deduct the smaller of: short-term capital gain if you sold the propertyDawn’s donation is limited to $50.
for its fair market value. Generally, this rule limitsa. $500, or Cars, boats, and aircraft.If you contribute athe deduction to your basis in the property.
car, boat, or aircraft to a charitable organization,b. The car’s fair market value on the date
you must determine its fair market value.  Cer-of the contribution. But if the car’s fair Example. You donate stock that you held
tain commercial firms and trade organizationsmarket value was more than your cost for 5 months to your church. The fair market
publish used car pricing guides, commonlyor other basis, you may have to reduce value of the stock on the day you donate it is
called “blue books,” containing complete dealerthe fair market value to get the deducti- $1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).
sale prices or dealer average prices for recentble amount, as described under Giving Because the $200 of appreciation would be
model years. The guides may be publishedProperty That Has Increased in Value in short-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your
monthly or seasonally and for different regionsPublication 526. deduction is limited to $800 (fair market value
of the country. These guides also provide esti-minus the appreciation).
2. If the car’s fair market value is $250 or mates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu-
more, you must have a written statement sual mileage, and physical condition. The pricesCapital gain property.Property is capital
from the qualified organization acknowl- are not “official” and these publications are not gain property if its sale at fair market value on
Page 156 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 159 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the date of the contribution would have resulted a contribution, it is not a contribution until you• Certain private foundations whose contri-
in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as- butions are pooled in a common fund, themake the note payments.
sets held more than 1 year, as well as certain income and principal of which are paid toOption.  If you grant an option to buy realreal property and depreciable property used in public charities.property at a bargain price to a charitable organi-your trade or business and, generally, held morezation, you cannot take a deduction until thethan 1 year. organization exercises the option. 30% LimitAmount of deduction — general rule. Borrowed funds. If you make a contribu-When figuring your deduction for a gift of capital A 30% limit applies to the following gifts.tion with borrowed funds, you can deduct thegain property, you usually can use the fair mar-contribution in the year you make it, regardless• Gifts to all qualified organizations otherket value of the gift. of when you repay the loan. than 50% limit organizations. This includesExceptions. In certain situations, you must gifts to veterans’ organizations, fraternalreduce the fair market value by any amount that societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer-would have been long-term capital gain if you tain private nonoperating foundations.had sold the property for its fair market value.Limits on Deductions • Gifts for the use of any organization. How-Generally, this means reducing the fair market
ever, if these gifts are of capital gain prop-value to the property’s cost or other basis.If your total contributions for the year are 20% orerty, they are subject to the 20% limit,
less of your adjusted gross income, you do notdescribed later, rather than the 30% limit.Bargain sales.A bargain sale of property to a
need to read this section. The limits discussedqualified organization (a sale or exchange for
here do not apply to you.less than the property’s fair market value) is Student living with you.Amounts you spendThe amount of your deduction is limited topartly a charitable contribution and partly a sale on behalf of a student living with you are subject50% of your adjusted gross income and may beor exchange. A bargain sale may result in a to the 30% limit. These amounts are consideredlimited to 30% or 20% of your adjusted grosstaxable gain. a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza-income, depending on the type of property yoution. See Expenses Paid for Student Living Withgive and the type of organization you give it to.More information. For more information on You, earlier.donated appreciated property, see Giving Prop- These limits are described below.
erty That Has Increased in Value in Publication If your contributions are more than any of the
Special 30% Limit for526. limits that apply, see Carryovers, later.
Capital Gain Property
50% Limit A special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gain
property to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts ofWhen To Deduct This limit applies to the total of all charitable
capital gain property to other organizations, seecontributions you make during the year. This
20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limitYou can deduct your contributions only in themeans that your deduction for charitable contri-
does not apply when you choose to reduce theyear you actually make them in cash or otherbutions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
fair market value of the property by the amountproperty (or in a later carryover year, as ex-justed gross income for the year.
that would have been long-term capital gain ifplained later under Carryovers). This applies Generally, the 50% limit is the only limit thatyou had sold the property. Instead, only the 50%whether you use the cash or an accrual methodapplies to gifts to organizations listed belowlimit applies.of accounting. under 50% limit organizations. But there is one
exception. A 30% limit also applies to these giftsTsunami donations deducted in Two separate 30% limits.This special 30%
if they are gifts of capital gain property for which2004. If you made a cash contribution limit for capital gain property is separate from the
you figure your deduction using fair marketin January 2005 for the relief of vic- other 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of aCAUTION
!
value without reduction for appreciation. (Seetims of the December 26, 2004, Indian Ocean contribution subject to one 30% limit does not
Special 30% Limit for Capital Gain Property,tsunami and chose to deduct it on your 2004 reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu-
later.)return, you cannot deduct it on your 2005 return. tions subject to the other 30% limit. However,
the total you deduct cannot be more than 50% of
Time of making contribution.Usually, you your adjusted gross income.50% limit organizations.You can ask any
make a contribution at the time of its uncondi-organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-
tional delivery. Example. Your adjusted gross income istion and most will be able to tell you. Or you can
$50,000. During the year, you gave capital gaincheck IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS TaxChecks. A check that you mail to a charity is property with a fair market value of $15,000 to aExempt/Government Entities Customer Serviceconsidered delivered on the date you mail it. 50% limit organization. You do not choose toat the number listed earlier under Organizations
Credit card. Contributions charged on your reduce the property’s fair market value by itsthat Qualify To Receive Deductible Contribu-
credit card are deductible in the year you make appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000tions. The following is a partial list of the types of
the charge. cash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%organizations that are 50% limit organizations.
limit organization. The $15,000 gift of property isPay-by-phone account.  If you use a • Churches and conventions or associationssubject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000pay-by-phone account, the date you make a of churches. cash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Bothcontribution is the date the financial institution gifts are fully deductible because neither is more• Educational organizations with a regularpays the amount. This date should be shown on than the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in eachfaculty and curriculum that normally havethe statement the financial institution sends to case) and together they are not more than thea regularly enrolled student body attendingyou. 50% limit ($25,000).classes on site. Stock certificate.A gift to a charity of a For more information, see the rules for elect-
• Hospitals and certain medical research or-properly endorsed stock certificate is completed ing the 50% limit for capital gain property under
ganizations associated with these hospi-on the date of mailing or other delivery to the How To Figure Your Deduction When Limits
tals. charity or to the charity’s agent. However, if you Apply in Publication 526.
give a stock certificate to your agent or to the• Publicly supported charities.issuing corporation for transfer to the name of 20% Limit• Private operating foundations.the charity, your gift is not completed until the
date the stock is transferred on the books of the• Private nonoperating foundations thatThis limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop-corporation. make qualifying distributions of 100% oferty to or for the use of qualified organizations
contributions within 21/2 months followingPromissory note. If you issue and deliver a (other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%
promissory note to a charitable organization as the year they receive the contributions. limit organizations).
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 157

Page 160 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. If payment was charged to a credit not need to describe or estimate theCarryovers card: the amount, transaction date, and value of the benefit.
to whom paid.You can carry over your contributions that you 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:are not able to deduct in the current year be-2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com-cause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income a. The date you file your return for themunication) from the charitable organiza-limits. You can deduct the excess in each of the year you make the contribution, ortion showing the name of the organization,next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyondthe date of the contribution, and the b. The due date, including extensions, forthat time. For more information, see Carryovers amount of the contribution. filing the return.in Publication 526.
3. Other reliable written records that include
the information described in (2). RecordsPayroll deductions.If you make a contribu-may be considered reliable if they weretion by payroll deduction, you do not need anmade at or near the time of the contribu-Records To Keep acknowledgment from the qualified organiza-tion, and were regularly kept by you, or if,tion. But if your employer deducted $250 orin the case of small donations, you haveYou must keep records to prove the amount of more from a single paycheck, you must keep:emblems, buttons, or other tokens that arethe cash and noncash contributions you make
regularly given to persons making small• A pay stub, Form W-2, or other documentduring the year. The kind of records you must
cash contributions. furnished by your employer that proveskeep depends on the amount of your contribu-
the amount withheld, andtions and whether they are cash or noncash
Car expenses. If you claim expenses directlycontributions. • A pledge card or other document from therelated to the use of your car in giving services toqualified organization that states the or-Note. An organization generally must give youa qualified organization, you must keep reliableganization does not provide goods or serv-a written statement if it receives a payment fromwritten records of your expenses. Whether yourices in return for any contribution made toyou that is more than $75 and is partly a contri-records are considered reliable depends on allit by payroll deduction.bution and partly for goods or services. (Seethe facts and circumstances. Generally, they
Contributions From Which You Benefit under may be considered reliable if you made them
Contributions You Can Deduct, earlier.) Keepregularly and at or near the time you had theOut-of-pocket expenses.If you render serv-
the statement for your records. It may satisfy allexpenses. ices to a qualified organization and have un-
or part of the recordkeeping requirements ex-Your records must show the name of the reimbursed out-of-pocket expenses related to
plained in the following discussions. organization you were serving and the date those services, you can satisfy the written ac-
each time you used your car for a charitable knowledgment requirement just discussed if:
purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate of
Cash Contributions 1. You have adequate records to prove the14 cents a mile, your records must show the
amount of the expenses, andmiles you drove your car for the charitable pur-Cash contributions include those paid by cash,
pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, yourcheck, credit card, or payroll deduction. They 2. By the required date, you get an acknowl-
records must show the costs of operating the caralso include your out-of-pocket expenses when edgment from the qualified organization
that are directly related to a charitable purpose.donating your services. that contains:
See Car expenses, earlier, underFor a contribution made in cash, the records
a. A description of the services you pro-Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services, foryou must keep depend on whether the contribu-
vided,the expenses you can deduct.tion is:
b. A statement of whether or not the or-• Less than $250, or
ganization provided you any goods orContributions of $250 or More• $250 or more. services to reimburse you for the ex-
penses you incurred,You can claim a deduction for a contribution of
Amount of contribution.In figuring whether$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg-c. A description and a good faith estimateyour contribution is $250 or more, do not com-ment of your contribution from the qualified or-of the value of any goods or servicesbine separate contributions. For example, if youganization or certain payroll deduction records.(other than intangible religious benefits)gave your church $25 each week, your weeklyIf you made more than one contribution of provided to reimburse you, andpayments do not have to be combined. Each$250 or more, you must have either a separated. A statement of any intangible religiouspayment is a separate contribution. acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg- benefits provided to you. If contributions are made by payroll deduc-ment that shows your total contributions.
tion, the deduction from each paycheck is
Acknowledgment. The acknowledgmenttreated as a separate contribution.
must meet these tests.If you made a payment that is partly for Noncash Contributions
goods and services, as described earlier under1. It must be written.Contributions From Which You Benefit, your For a contribution not made in cash, the records
contribution is the amount of the payment that is2. It must include: you must keep depend on whether your deduc-
more than the value of the goods and services. tion for the contribution is:a. The amount of cash you contributed,
1. Less than $250,b. Whether the qualified organization gave
Contributions of Less Than $250 you any goods or services as a result of2. At least $250 but not more than $500,
your contribution (other than certain to-For each cash contribution that is less than 3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, orken items and membership benefits),$250, you must keep one of the following items.and 4. Over $5,000.
1. A canceled check, or a legible and reada-c. A description and good faith estimate of
ble account statement that shows: the value of any goods or services de-Amount of deduction. In figuring whether
scribed in (b). If the only benefit you your deduction is $500 or more, combine youra. If payment was by check: the check received was an intangible religious claimed deductions for all similar items of prop-number, amount, date posted, and to benefit (such as admission to a relig- erty donated to any charitable organization dur-whom paid. ious ceremony) that generally is not ing the year. If you received goods or services in
b. If payment was by electronic funds sold in a commercial transaction return, as described earlier in Contributions
transfer: the amount, date posted, and outside the donative context, the ac-From Which You Benefit, reduce your contribu-
to whom paid. knowledgment must say so and does tion by the value of those goods or services. If
Page 158 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 161 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you figure your deduction by reducing the fair cord showing the years for which you your contribution (other than certain to-
market value of the donated property by its ap-made the choice, contributions for the cur-ken items and membership benefits),
preciation, as described earlier in Giving Prop- rent year to which the choice applies, and and
erty That Has Increased in Value, your carryovers from preceding years to which c. A description and good faith estimate ofcontribution is the reduced amount. the choice applies. See How To Figure the value of any goods or services de-Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-
scribed in (b). If the only benefit youlication 526 for information on how to
received was an intangible religiousDeductions of Less Than $250 make the capital gain property election.
benefit (such as admission to a relig-• The amount you claim as a deduction forIf you make any noncash contribution, you must ious ceremony) that generally is notthe tax year as a result of the contribution,get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ- sold in a commercial transactionif you contribute less than your entire inter-ization showing: outside the donative context, the ac-est in the property during the tax year. knowledgment must say so and does1. The name of the charitable organization,Your records must include the amount you
not need to describe or estimate theclaimed as a deduction in any earlier2. The date and location of the charitable value of the benefit.years for contributions of other interests incontribution, and this property. They must also include the
3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:3. A reasonably detailed description of thename and address of each organization to
property. which you contributed the other interests,a. The date you file your return for thethe place where any such tangible prop- year you make the contribution, orA letter or other written communica-erty is located or kept, and the name of
tion from the charitable organizationany person in possession of the property,b. The due date, including extensions, for
acknowledging receipt of the contri-other than the organization to which you
TIP
filing the return.
bution and containing the information in (1), (2),contributed.
and (3) will serve as a receipt. • The terms of any conditions attached toYou are not required to have a receipt wherethe gift of property.it is impractical to get one (for example, if you Deductions Over $500
leave property at a charity’s unattended drop
site). You are required to give additional information ifDeductions of At Least $250
you claim a deduction over $500 for noncashBut Not More Than $500Additional records.You must also keep reli- charitable contributions. See Records To Keepable written records for each item of donatedIf you claim a deduction of at least $250 but notin Publication 526 for more information.property. Your written records must include themore than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-following information. bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
• The name and address of the organizationment of your contribution from the qualifiedQualified Conservation
to which you contributed. organization. If you made more than one contri-Contributionbution of $250 or more, you must have either a• The date and location of the contribution.separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-If the gift was a qualified conservation contribu-
• A description of the property in detail rea-knowledgment that shows your total contribu-tion, your records must also include the fairsonable under the circumstances. For ation. market value of the underlying property beforesecurity, keep the name of the issuer, theThe acknowledgment must contain the infor-and after the gift and the conservation purposetype of security, and whether it is regularlymation in items (1) through (3) listed under De- furthered by the gift. See Qualified conservationtraded on a stock exchange or in an ductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and yourcontribution in Publication 561 for more informa-over-the-counter market. written records must include the informationtion.listed in that discussion under Additional rec-• The fair market value of the property at the
ords.time of the contribution and how you fig-
The acknowledgment must also meet theseured the fair market value. If it was deter-
tests.mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of
How To Reportthe appraisal. 
1. It must be written.
• The cost or other basis of the property if Report your charitable contributions on Sched-2. It must include:you must reduce its fair market value by ule A (Form 1040).appreciation. Your records should also in-a. A description (but not necessarily theIf your total deduction for all noncash contri-clude the amount of the reduction and how value) of any property you contributed,butions for the year is over $500, you must alsoyou figured it. If you choose the 50% limit
file Form 8283. See How To Report in Publica-instead of the special 30% limit on certain b. Whether the qualified organization gave
capital gain property, you must keep a re- you any goods or services as a result of tion 526 for more information.
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 159

Page 162 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items • Accidentally breaking articles such as
glassware or china under normal condi-You may want to see: tions.
25. Publication • A family pet.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions • A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone
of Assets else to set it.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and • A car accident if your willful negligence orNonbusiness
Thefts willful act caused it. The same is true if the
willful act or willful negligence of someone❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and TheftCasualty and acting for you caused the accident.Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
Property) • Progressive deterioration (explained next).
Theft Losses
Form (and Instructions) Progressive deterioration.Loss of prop-
erty due to progressive deterioration is not de-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized ductible as a casualty loss. This is because theDeductions damage results from a steadily operating causeWhat’s New
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gains or a normal process, rather than from a sudden
and Losses event. The following are examples of damageKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. due to progressive deterioration.❏ 4684 Casualties and TheftsThis Act provides tax relief for persons affected
by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be
• The steady weakening of a building due toable to forgo the limits on personal casualty
normal wind and weather conditions.losses and extend the replacement period for
property in the Hurricane Katrina disaster area. • The deterioration and damage to a water
You may also be able to postpone certain tax heater that bursts. However, the rust andCasualtydeadlines. See Publication 4492. water damage to rugs and drapes caused
by the bursting of a water heater doesA casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss of
qualify as a casualty.property resulting from an identifiable event that
is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. • Most losses of property caused by
droughts. To be deductible, a drought-re-Introduction • A sudden event is one that is swift, not lated loss generally must be incurred in a
This chapter explains the tax treatment of per-gradual or progressive. trade or business or in a transaction en-
sonal (not business related) casualty losses, tered into for profit.• An unexpected event is one that is ordi-theft losses, and losses on deposits.
narily unanticipated and unintended. • Termite or moth damage.
The chapter also explains the following top-• An unusual event is one that is not a • The damage or destruction of trees,ics. day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-
cal of the activity in which you were en-ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.• How to figure the amount of your loss. gaged. However, a sudden destruction due to an
• How to treat insurance and other reim- unexpected or unusual infestation of beet-
bursements you receive. les or other insects may result in a casu-Deductible losses. Deductible casualty alty loss.• The deduction limits. losses can result from a number of different
causes, including the following.• When and how to report a casualty or
theft.
• Car accidents (but see Nondeductible
losses, next, for exceptions).
Forms to file.  When you have a casualty or Theft• Earthquakes.theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also
have to file one or both of the following forms. A theft is the taking and removing of money or• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next,
property with the intent to deprive the owner of it.for exceptions).
The taking of property must be illegal under the• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc-• Floods. laws of the state where it occurred and it musttions
have been done with criminal intent.• Government-ordered demolition or reloca-• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-and Losses Theft includes the taking of money or prop-cause of a disaster as discussed undererty by the following means.Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
Condemnations. For information on condem- • Mine cave-ins. • Blackmail.nations of property, see Involuntary Conver-
sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544. • Shipwrecks. • Burglary.
• Sonic booms. • Embezzlement.
Workbook for casualties and thefts.Publi- • Storms, including hurricanes and torna-• Extortion.cation 584 is available to help you make a list ofdoes.your stolen or damaged personal-use property • Kidnapping for ransom.
and figure your loss. It includes schedules to• Terrorist attacks. • Larceny.help you figure the loss on your home, its con-• Vandalism.tents, and your motor vehicles. • Robbery.
• Volcanic eruptions. • Threats.
Other sources of information.For informa-
tion on a casualty or theft loss of business orNondeductible losses.A casualty loss is not The taking of money or property through fraud
income-producing property, see Publication deductible if the damage or destruction is or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under
547. caused by the following. state or local law.
Page 160 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 163 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Decline in market value of stock.You can- actual loss is determined and deduct the loss as ance or other reimbursement you received
not deduct as a theft loss the decline in market a nonbusiness bad debt in that year. or expect to receive.
value of stock acquired on the open market for For personal-use property and property used inHow to report. The kind of deduction youinvestment if the decline is caused by disclosure performing services as an employee, apply thechoose for your loss on deposits determinesof accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct deduction limits, discussed later, to determinehow you report your loss. If you choose:by the officers or directors of the corporation that the amount of your deductible loss.issued the stock. However, you can deduct as a
• Casualty loss — report it on Form 4684capital loss the loss you sustain when you sell or Leased property.If you are liable for casualtyfirst and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).exchange the stock or the stock becomes com- damage to property you lease, your loss is the
pletely worthless. You report a capital loss on• Ordinary loss — report it on Schedule Aamount you must pay to repair the property
Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information(Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemizedminus any insurance or other reimbursement
about stock sales, worthless stock, and capitaldeduction. you receive or expect to receive.
losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550. • Nonbusiness bad debt — report it on
Schedule D (Form 1040). Adjusted BasisMislaid or lost property.The simple disap-
pearance of money or property is not a theft. Adjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu-However, an accidental loss or disappearanceMore information.For more information, seeally cost) increased or decreased by variousof property can qualify as a casualty if it resultsSpecial Treatment for Losses on Deposits inevents, such as improvements and casualtyfrom an identifiable event that is sudden, unex-Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in losses. For more information, see chapter 13.pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, andthe Instructions for Form 4684.
unusual events are defined earlier.
Decrease in
Example. A car door is accidentally Fair Market Valueslammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
Proof of Lossyour diamond ring. The diamond falls from the Fair market value (FMV) is the price for whichring and is never found. The loss of the diamond you could sell your property to a willing buyerTo deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must beis a casualty. when neither of you has to sell or buy and both ofable to prove that you had a casualty or theft.
you know all the relevant facts.You must be able to support the amount you
The decrease in FMV is the difference be-claim for the loss as discussed next.
tween the property’s fair market value immedi-
Loss on Deposits ately before and immediately after the casualtyCasualty loss proof.For a casualty loss, your
or theft.records should show all the following.
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, credit FMV of stolen property.The FMV of property• The type of casualty (car accident, fire,union, or other financial institution becomes in- immediately after a theft is considered to bestorm, etc.) and when it occurred.solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type of zero, since you no longer have the property.loss, you can choose one of the following ways• That the loss was a direct result of theto deduct the loss. casualty. Example. Several years ago, you pur-
• As a casualty loss. chased silver dollars at face value for $150. This• That you were the owner of the property
is your adjusted basis in the property. Your silveror, if you leased the property from some-• As an ordinary loss. dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of theone else, that you were contractually liable• As a nonbusiness bad debt. coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen,to the owner for the damage.
and insurance did not cover them. Your theft
• Whether a claim for reimbursement existsloss is $150.Casualty loss or ordinary loss.You can for which there is a reasonable expecta-choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu- Recovered stolen property.Recovered sto-tion of recovery.alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in len property is your property that was stolen and
which you can reasonably estimate how much of later returned to you. If you recovered propertyTheft loss proof.For a theft loss, your rec-your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or after you had already taken a theft loss deduc-ords should show all the following.bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen- tion, you must refigure your loss using the
erally made on the return you file for that year smaller of the property’s adjusted basis (ex-• When you discovered that your propertyand applies to all your losses on deposits for the plained earlier) or the decrease in FMV from thewas missing.year in that particular financial institution. If you time just before it was stolen until the time it was
treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, you• That your property was stolen. recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total
cannot treat the same amount of the loss as a loss for the year in which the loss was deducted.• That you were the owner of the property.nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomes If your refigured loss is less than the loss you
worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-• Whether a claim for reimbursement existsdeducted, you generally have to report the dif-
ness bad debt deduction for any amount of loss for which there is a reasonable expecta-ference as income in the recovery year. But
that is more than the estimated amount you tion of recovery. report the difference only up to the amount of the
deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Once loss that reduced your tax. For more information
you make this choice, you cannot change it on the amount to report, see Recoveries in
without approval of the Internal Revenue Serv- chapter 12.
ice.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aAmount of Loss
miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule Figuring Decrease in FMV—Figure the amount of your loss using the follow-A (Form 1040), line 22. The maximum amount Items To Considering steps. you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are
married filing separately) reduced by any ex- To figure the decrease in FMV because of a1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is casualty or theft, you generally need a compe-erty before the casualty or theft.subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income tent appraisal. But other measures can also be
limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary used to establish certain decreases.2. Determine the decrease in fair marketloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.value of the property as a result of theAppraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif-casualty or theft.Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose ference between the FMV of the property imme-
3. From the smaller of the amounts you de-to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an diately before a casualty or theft and
termined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-ordinary loss, you must wait until the year the immediately afterward should be made by a
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 161

Page 164 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
competent appraiser. The appraiser must rec- payment until a later tax year. See Reimburse-Figuring Decrease in FMV—
ment Received After Deducting Loss, later.ognize the effects of any general market declineItems Not To Consider
that may occur along with the casualty. This Failure to file a claim for reimbursement.IfThe following items are generally not consideredinformation is needed to limit any deduction to your property is covered by insurance, you mustwhen establishing the decrease in the FMV ofthe actual loss resulting from damage to the file a timely insurance claim for reimbursementyour property.property. of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct this
loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, thisReplacement cost. The cost of replacing sto-Several factors are important in evaluating rule does not apply to the portion of the loss notlen or destroyed property is not part of a casualtythe accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-or theft loss.lowing. ble).Cost of protection.The cost of protecting
your property against a casualty or theft is not• The appraiser’s familiarity with your prop- Example. You have a car insurance policypart of a casualty or theft loss. For example, youerty before and after the casualty or theft. with a $500 deductible. Because your insurancecannot deduct the amount you spend on insur-did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision,• The appraiser’s knowledge of sales ofance or to board up your house against a storm.the $500 would be deductible (subject to thecomparable property in the area. If you make permanent improvements to deduction limits discussed later). This is trueyour property to protect it against a casualty or• The appraiser’s knowledge of conditions in even if you do not file an insurance claim, sincetheft, add the cost of these improvements tothe area of the casualty. your insurance policy would never have reim-your basis in the property. An example would bebursed you for the deductible.• The appraiser’s method of appraisal. the cost of a dike to prevent flooding.
Gain from reimbursement. If your reim-Related expenses. Any incidental expensesbursement is more than your adjusted basis inCost of cleaning up or making repairs.The you have due to a casualty or theft, such asthe property, you have a gain. This is true even ifcost of repairing damaged property is not part ofexpenses for the treatment of personal injuries,the decrease in the FMV of the property isfor temporary housing, or for a rental car, are nota casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have apart of your casualty or theft loss.after a casualty. But you can use the cost of gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you may
cleaning up or making repairs as a measure of be able to postpone reporting the gain. SeeSentimental value. Do not consider senti-
the decrease in FMV if you meet all the following Publication 547 for more information on how tomental value when determining your loss. If a
conditions. treat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualtyfamily portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-
or theft.aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your
• The repairs are actually made. loss only on its FMV.
• The repairs are necessary to bring theDecline in market value of property in or nearTypes of Reimbursementsproperty back to its condition before thecasualty area.A decrease in the value of your
property because it is in or near an area thatcasualty. The most common type of reimbursement is an
suffered a casualty, or that might again suffer ainsurance payment for your stolen or damaged• The amount spent for repairs is not exces-casualty, is not to be taken into consideration.property. Other types of reimbursements aresive. You have a loss only for actual casualty damagediscussed next. Also see the Instructions for
to your property. However, if your home is in a• The repairs take care of the damage only. Form 4684.
federally declared disaster area, see Disaster• The value of the property after the repairs Employer’s emergency disaster fund.If youArea Losses in Publication 547.
is not, due to the repairs, more than the receive money from your employer’s emergency
Costs of photographs and appraisals.Pho- disaster fund and you must use that money tovalue of the property before the casualty.tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful inrehabilitate or replace property on which you are
establishing the condition and value of the prop-claiming a casualty loss deduction, you mustLandscaping. The cost of restoring land-erty after it was damaged. Photographs showingtake that money into consideration in computingscaping to its original condition after a casualtythe condition of the property after it was re-the casualty loss deduction. Take into consider-may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may bepaired, restored, or replaced may also be help-ation only the amount you used to replace yourable to measure your loss by what you spend onful. destroyed or damaged property.the following.    Appraisals are used to figure the decrease
in FMV because of a casualty or theft. See Example. Your home was extensively dam-• Removing destroyed or damaged trees Appraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease inaged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse-and shrubs minus any salvage you re- FMV — Items To Consider , for informationment from your insurance company wasceive. about appraisals. $10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief
The costs of photographs and appraisalsfund for its employees. Employees receiving• Pruning and other measures taken to pre-used as evidence of the value and condition ofmoney from the fund had to use it to rehabilitateserve damaged trees and shrubs. property damaged as a result of a casualty areor replace their damaged or destroyed property.
• Replanting necessary to restore the prop-not a part of the loss. You can claim these costsYou received $4,000 from the fund and spent
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subjecterty to its approximate value before the the entire amount on repairs to your home. In
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit oncasualty. figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce
Schedule A (Form 1040). For information aboutyour unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000
miscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28.you received from your employer’s fund. YourCar value.  Books issued by various automo- casualty loss before applying the deduction lim-bile organizations that list your car may be useful its discussed later is $6,000.Insurance and Otherin figuring the value of your car. You can modify
Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cashthe book’s retail value by such factors as mile-Reimbursements
gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limitsage and the condition of your car to figure its
If you receive an insurance payment or otheron how you can use the money, you do notvalue. The prices are not official, but they may
type of reimbursement, you must subtract thereduce your casualty loss by these excludablebe useful in determining value and suggestingreimbursement when you figure your loss. Youcash gifts. This applies even if you use therelative prices for comparison with current salesdo not have a casualty or theft loss to the extentmoney to pay for repairs to property damaged inand offerings in your area. If your car is not listedyou are reimbursed. the disaster.
in the books, determine its value from otherIf you expect to be reimbursed for part or all
sources. A dealer’s offer for your car as aof your loss, you must subtract the expectedExample. Your home was damaged by a
trade-in on a new car is not usually a measure ofreimbursement when you figure your loss. You hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash
its true value. must reduce your loss even if you do not receive gifts to you which were excludable from your
Page 162 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 165 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for the year you regain the use of your main home reimbursement in your income for the year you
repairs to your home. There were no limits or or, if later, for the year you receive the taxable receive it. However, if any part of the original
restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts. part of the insurance payment. deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier
Because it was an excludable gift, the money year, do not include that part of the reimburse-
Example. Your main home was destroyedyou received and used to pay for repairs to your ment in your income. You do not refigure your
by a tornado in August 2003. You regained usehome does not reduce your casualty loss on the tax for the year you claimed the deduction. For
of your home in November 2004. The insurancedamaged home. more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.
payments you received in 2003 and 2004 were If the total of all the reimbursementsInsurance payments for living expenses. $1,500 more than the temporary increase in you receive is more than your ad-You do not reduce your casualty loss by insur-your living expenses during those years. You justed basis in the destroyed or stolenCAUTION
!
ance payments you receive to cover living ex-include this amount in income on your 2004property, you will have a gain on the casualty orpenses in either of the following situations.Form 1040. If, in 2005, you receive further pay-theft. If you have already taken a deduction for aments to cover the living expenses you had in• You lose the use of your main home be- loss and you receive the reimbursement in a2003 and 2004, you must include those pay-cause of a casualty. later year, you may have to include the gain inments in income on your 2005 Form 1040. your income for the later year. Include the gain• Government authorities do not allow you
as ordinary income up to the amount of yourDisaster relief.Food, medical supplies, andaccess to your main home because of a
deduction that reduced your tax for the earlierother forms of assistance you receive do notcasualty or threat of one.
year. See Publication 547 for more informationreduce your casualty loss unless they are
on how to treat a gain from the reimbursement ofreplacements for lost or destroyed property.Inclusion in income. If these insurance
a casualty or theft.These items are not taxable income to you.payments are more than the temporary increase
in your living expenses, you must include the Qualified disaster relief payments youActual reimbursement same as expected.Ifexcess in your income. Report this amount on receive for expenses you incurred asyou receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-Form 1040, line 21. However, if the casualty a result of a Presidentially declared
TIP
pected, you do not have any amount to includeoccurs in a Presidentially declared disasterdisaster, are not taxable income to you. Forin your income or any loss to deduct.area, none of the insurance payments are tax-more information, see Disaster Area Losses in
able. See Qualified disaster relief payments, Publication 547. Example. In December 2005, you had a col-under Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. Disaster unemployment assistance pay- lision while driving your personal car. Repairs toA temporary increase in your living expensesments are unemployment benefits that are tax-the car cost $950. You had $100 deductibleis the difference between the actual living ex-able. collision insurance. Your insurance companypenses you and your family incurred during theGenerally, disaster relief grants and qualifiedagreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-period you could not use your home and yourdisaster mitigation payments made under theage. Because you expected a reimbursementnormal living expenses for that period. ActualRobert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-from the insurance company, you did not have aliving expenses are the reasonable and neces-gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-casualty loss deduction in 2005.sary expenses incurred because of the loss ofsurance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) areDue to the $100 rule (discussed later underyour main home. Generally, these expenses in-not includible in your income. See Disaster Area Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100clude the amounts you pay for the following.Losses in Publication 547. deductible you paid. When you receive the $850
from the insurance company in 2006, do not• Rent for suitable housing.
report it as income.• Transportation. Reimbursement Received After
• Food. Deducting Loss Single Casualty on
• Utilities. If you figured your casualty or theft loss usingMultiple Properties
your expected reimbursement, you may have to• Miscellaneous services.
adjust your tax return for the tax year in whichPersonal property.If a single casualty or theftNormal living expenses consist of these sameyou receive your actual reimbursement. Thisinvolves more than one item of personal prop-expenses that you would have incurred but didsection explains the adjustment you may haveerty, you must figure the loss on each itemnot because of the casualty or the threat of one.to make. separately. Then combine the losses to deter-
Actual reimbursement less than expected. mine your total loss from that casualty or theft.Example. As a result of a fire, you vacated
If you later receive less reimbursement than youPersonal property is any property that is not realyour apartment for a month and moved to a
expected, include that difference as a loss withproperty.motel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.
your other losses (if any) on your return for theNone was charged for the month the apartment
year in which you can reasonably expect no Example. A fire in your home destroyed anwas vacated. Your motel rent for this month was
more reimbursement. upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-$1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for
tique table. You did not have fire insurance tofood. Your food expenses for the month you
Example. Your personal car had a FMV ofcover your loss. (This was the only casualty orlived in the motel were $400. You received
$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision withtheft you had during the year.) You paid $750 for$1,100 from your insurance company to cover
another car in 2004. The accident was due to thethe chair and you established that it had a FMVyour living expenses. You determine the pay-
negligence of the other driver. At the end ofof $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000ment you must include in income as follows.
2004, there was a reasonable prospect that theand had a FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.
owner of the other car would reimburse you inYou bought the table at an auction for $1001) Insurance payment for living
full. You subtracted the expected reimburse-before discovering it was an antique. It had beenexpenses .................. $1,100
2) Actual expenses during the ment when you figured your loss. You did notappraised at $900 before the fire. You figure
month you are unable to use have a deductible loss in 2004. your loss on each of these items as follows:
your home because of fire . . . 1,600 In January 2005, the court awarded you a
3) Normal living expenses..... 7 2 5 Chair Rug Tablejudgment of $2,000. However, in July it became
4) Temporary increase in living apparent that you will be unable to collect any1) Basis (cost)...... $750 $3,000 $100expenses: Subtract line 3 amount from the other driver. You can deduct
from line 2.................. 8 7 5 2) FMV before fire . . . $500 $2,500 $900the loss in 2005 subject to the limits discussed5) Amount of payment includible 3) FMV after fire..... – 0 – – 0 – – 0 –later.in income: Subtract line 4 4) Decrease in FMV . . $500 $2,500 $900
Actual reimbursement more than expected.from line 1.................. $  2 2 5 5) Loss (smaller of (1) or
If you later receive more reimbursement than(4))............ $500 $2,500 $100
Tax year of inclusion.You include the tax- you expected after you claimed a deduction for
6) Total loss....... $3,100able part of the insurance payment in income for the loss, you may have to include the extra
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 163

Page 166 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$100 Rule 10% Rule
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One Person— Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married Couple—
With Loss From theFiling Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
Real property.In figuring a casualty loss on personal use or your family’s use, there are two single casualty when the damage is from two or
personal-use real property, treat the entire prop- limits on the amount you can deduct for yourmore closely related causes, such as wind and
erty (including any improvements, such as build- casualty or theft loss. flood damage caused by the same storm.
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure the
1. You must reduce each casualty or theftloss using the smaller of the adjusted basis or 10% Ruleloss by $100 ($100 rule).the decrease in FMV of the entire property.
2. You must further reduce the total of allYou must reduce the total of all your casualty orExample. You bought your home a few your casualty or theft losses by 10% oftheft losses on personal-use property by 10% ofyears ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for theyour adjusted gross income (10% rule).your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule afterland and $140,000 for the house). You also you reduce each loss by $100. If you have bothYou make these reductions on Form 4684.spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fire gains and losses from casualties or thefts, seeThese rules are explained next and Tabledestroyed your home. The fire also damaged
Gains and losses, later in this discussion.25-1 summarizes how to apply the $100 rule andthe shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire
the 10% rule in various situations. For morewas your only casualty or theft loss this year.
Example 1. In June, you discovered thatdetailed explanations and examples, see Publi-Competent appraisers valued the property as a
cation 547. your house had been burglarized. Your losswhole at $200,000 before the fire, but only
after insurance reimbursement was $2,000.$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house-Property used partly for business and partlyYour adjusted gross income for the year youhold furnishings is not shown in this example. Itfor personal purposes. When property is discovered the theft is $29,500. You first applywould be figured separately on each item, asused partly for personal purposes and partly forthe $100 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure yourexplained earlier under Personal property.) business or income-producing purposes, the
Shortly after the fire, the insurance company theft loss deduction as follows.casualty or theft loss deduction must be figured
paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure yourseparately for the personal-use part and for the1) Loss after insurance........... $2,000casualty loss as follows: business or income-producing part. You must2) Subtract $100............... 1 0 0figure each loss separately because the $1003) Loss after $100 rule........... $1,9001) Adjusted basis of the entire rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI..... 2,950property (land, building, and the personal-use part of the property. 5) Theft loss deduction......... –0–landscaping)............ $162,000
2) FMV of entire property before You do not have a theft loss deduction be-$100 Rulefire................... $200,000 cause your loss after you apply the $100 rule3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000After you have figured your casualty or theft loss($1,900) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross4) Decrease in FMV of entire on personal-use property, you must reduce thatincome ($2,950).property............... $170,000 loss by $100. This reduction applies to each total
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) . . . $162,000casualty or theft loss. It does not matter howExample 2. In March, you had a car acci-
6) Subtract insurance........ 155,000 many pieces of property are involved in andent that totally destroyed your car. You did not7) Amount of loss after event. Only a single $100 reduction applies.have collision insurance on your car, so you didreimbursement .......... $7,000 not receive any insurance reimbursement. Your
Example. A hailstorm damages your homeloss on the car was $1,200. In November, a fire
and your car. Determine the amount of loss, asdamaged your basement and totally destroyed
discussed earlier, for each of these items. Sincethe furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsthe losses are due to a single event, you com-stored there. Your loss on the basement itemsDeduction Limits bine the losses and reduce the combined after reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjustedamount by $100. gross income for the year that the accident andAfter you have figured your casualty or theft
fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu-loss, you must figure how much of the loss youSingle event. Generally, events closely re-
alty loss deduction as follows.can deduct. If the loss was to property for your lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a
Page 164 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 167 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Base- the IRS has decided to postpone tax deadlines• The year the disaster occurred.Car ment for up to 1 year.
• The year immediately preceding the year1) Loss .............. $1,200 $1,700
the disaster occurred.2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100 Abatement of interest and penalties.The
3) Loss after $100 rule.... $1,100 $1,600 IRS may abate the interest and penalties on
Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may underpaid income tax for the length of any post-4) Total loss................ $2,700
5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI . . . 2,500 postpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines ofponement of tax deadlines.
6) Casualty loss deduction..... $200 taxpayers who are affected by a Presidentially
declared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRSMore information.For more information, see
may postpone include those for filing incomeDisaster Area Losses in Publication 547.Gains and losses.If you had both gains and
and employment tax returns, paying income andlosses from casualties or thefts to personal-use
employment taxes, and making contributions toproperty, you must compare your total gains to
a traditional IRA or Roth IRA.your total losses. Do this after you have reduced
each loss by any reimbursements and by $100.If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS willHow To Reportpublicize the postponement in your area by pub-Casualty or theft gains do not include
lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenuegains you choose to postpone. See Gains and Losses
procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-Publication 547 for information on theCAUTION
!
postponement of gain. dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB).Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible
loss from a casualty or theft. If you have moreLosses more than gains.If your losses areWho is eligible.If the IRS postpones a tax
than one casualty or theft, use a separate Formmore than your recognized gains, subtract yourdeadline, the following taxpayers are eligible for4684 to determine your gain or loss for eachgains from your losses and reduce the result bythe postponement. event. Combine the gains and losses on one10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, if
Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as toany, is your deductible loss. • Any individual whose main home is lo-
which lines to fill out. In addition, you must usecated in a covered disaster area (definedGains more than losses. If your recog- the appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss.next).nized gains are more than your losses, subtract The schedule you use depends on whether youyour losses from your gains. The difference is• Any business entity or sole proprietorhave a gain or loss.treated as capital gain and must be reported onwhose principal place of business is lo-
Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does notcated in a covered disaster area. If you have a: Report it on:apply to your gains.
Gain .......... Schedule D (Form• Any relief worker affiliated with a recog-
1040)nized government or philanthropic organi-
Loss .......... Schedule A (Formzation who is assisting in a covered 1040)disaster area.When To Report
• Any individual, business entity, or sole
Gains and Losses proprietor whose records are needed toAdjustments to basis.If you have a casualty
or theft loss, you must decrease your basis inmeet a postponed deadline, providedIf you receive an insurance or other reimburse- the property by any deductible loss and anythose records are maintained in a coveredment that is more than your adjusted basis in the insurance or other reimbursement. Amountsdisaster area. The main home or principaldestroyed or stolen property, you have a gain you spend to restore your property after a casu-place of business does not have to befrom the casualty or theft. You must include this alty increase your adjusted basis. See Adjustedlocated in the covered disaster area.gain in your income in the year you receive the Basis in chapter 13 for more information.reimbursement, unless you choose to postpone• Any estate or trust that has tax records
reporting the gain as explained in Publicationnecessary to meet a postponed tax dead-
547. Net operating loss (NOL).If your casualty orline, provided those records are main-If you have a loss, see Table 25-2. theft loss deduction is more than your income,tained in a covered disaster area.
you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL to
• The spouse on a joint return with a tax-lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you toLoss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on
payer who is eligible for postponements.deposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial get a refund for tax you have already paid. Or,
institution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier. you can use it to lower your tax in a later year.• Any other person determined by the IRS
You do not have to be in business to have anto be affected by a Presidentially declared
NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For moreCasualty loss.Generally, you can deduct a disaster.
information, see Publication 536, Net Operatingcasualty loss only in the tax year in which the
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, andcasualty occurred. This is true even if you do notCovered disaster area.This is an area of a
repair or replace the damaged property until a Trusts.Presidentially declared disaster area in whichlater year.
Table 25-2. When To Deduct a Loss
Theft loss.You generally can deduct a theft
loss only in the year you discover your propertyIF you have a loss... THEN deduct it in the year...
was stolen. You must be able to show that there
from a casualty, the loss occurred.was a theft, but you do not have to know when
the theft occurred. However, you should showin a Presidentially declared disaster the disaster occurred or the year immediately before thewhen you discovered that your property wasarea, disaster.missing.
from a theft,  the theft was discovered.
Disaster Area Loss on a deposit treated as a:
• casualty, • a reasonable estimate can be made.If you have a casualty loss from a disaster that
occurred in a Presidentially declared disaster• bad debt, • deposits are totally worthless.
area, you can choose to deduct the loss on your
• ordinary loss, • a reasonable estimate can be made.tax return or amended return for either of the
following years.
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 165

Page 168 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Who does not need to use this chapter.If Traveling Away Fromyou are an employee, you will not need to read
Homethis chapter if all of the following are true.
26. • You fully accounted to your employer forYou are traveling away from home if:
your work-related expenses. • Your duties require you to be away from
• You received full reimbursement for your the general area of your tax home (defined
expenses. later) substantially longer than an ordinaryCar Expenses day’s work, and• Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so. • You need to sleep or rest to meet the
and Other demands of your work while away from• There is no amount shown with a code “L” home.in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and
Tax Statement. This rest requirement is not satisfied by merelyEmployee
napping in your car. You do not have to be awayIf you meet all of these conditions, there is nofrom your tax home for a whole day or from duskneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-Business to dawn as long as your relief from duty is longments on your return. See Reimbursements, enough to get necessary sleep or rest.later, if you would like more information on reim-
bursements and accounting to your employer.Expenses Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.
You leave your home terminal on a regularlyIf you meet these conditions and yourscheduled round-trip run between two cities andemployer included reimbursements return home 16 hours later. During the run, youon your Form W-2 in error, ask your
TIP
have 6 hours off at your turnaround point whereWhat’s New employer for a corrected Form W-2. you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get
necessary sleep before starting the return trip.Standard mileage rate.For 2005, the stan-Useful Items You are considered to be away from home.dard mileage rate for the cost of operating yourYou may want to see:
car for business use is: Example 2. You are a truck driver. You
Publication leave your terminal and return to it later the• 401/2 cents per mile for the period January same day. You get an hour off at your turn-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car1 through August 31, 2005, and around point to eat. Because you are not off toExpenses get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not• 481/2 cents per mile for the period Septem-❏ 535 Business Expenses an adequate rest period, you are not travelingber 1 through December 31, 2005. away from home.❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
Car expenses and use of the standard mile- Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a
Form (and Instructions) member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-age rate are explained under Transportation Ex-
nent duty assignment overseas, you are notpenses, later. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
traveling away from home. You cannot deductDeductionsDepreciation limits on cars, trucks, and your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Lossvans. The total section 179 deduction and de- not deduct these expenses even if you have to
From Businesspreciation you can claim on cars, trucks, and maintain a home in the United States for your
family members who are not allowed to accom-vans you use for business purposes has de- ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit
pany you overseas. If you are transferred fromcreased for vehicles first placed in service in From Business
one permanent duty station to another, you may2005. See Depreciation limits in chapter 4 of ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Loss have deductible moving expenses, which arePublication 463. From Farming explained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty❏ Form 2106 Employee Business
aboard a ship that has regular eating and livingExpenses
facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed EmployeeIntroduction expense purposes.Business ExpensesYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and Travel to family home.If you (and your fam-
necessary business-related expenses you have ily) do not live at your tax home (defined later),
for: you cannot deduct the cost of traveling between
your tax home and your family home. You also
• Travel, cannot deduct the cost of meals and lodgingTravel Expenses
while at your tax home. See Example 1 that• Entertainment, follows.If you temporarily travel away from your tax• Gifts, or If you are working temporarily in the samehome, you can use this section to determine if
city where you and your family live, you may beyou have deductible travel expenses. This sec-• Transportation.
considered as traveling away from home. Seetion discusses:An ordinary expense is one that is common and Example 2, below.
accepted in your field of trade, business, or• Traveling away from home,
profession. A necessary expense is one that is Example 1. You are a truck driver and you• Tax home,helpful and appropriate for your business. An and your family live in Tucson. You are em-
• Temporary assignment or job, andexpense does not have to be required to be ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnconsidered necessary. • What travel expenses are deductible. to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend oneThis chapter explains: It also discusses the standard meal allowance,night there before returning home. You cannot
rules for travel inside and outside the Uniteddeduct any expenses you have for meals and• What expenses are deductible, States, and deductible convention expenses.lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
• How to report your expenses on your re- Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is
Travel expenses defined.For tax purposes,turn, your tax home.
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary• What records you need to prove your ex-expenses (defined earlier) of traveling awayExample 2. Your family home is in Pitts-penses, and from home for your business, profession, or job.burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The
• How to treat any expense reimbursements You will find examples of deductible travel rest of the year you work for the same employer
you may receive. expenses in Table 26-1. in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants
Page 166 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 169 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the 2. You have living expenses at your main tax home as a moving expense. See Publication
same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-home that you duplicate because your 521 for more information.
more. business requires you to be away from that
Because you spend most of your working home. Exception for federal crime investigations or
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, prosecutions. If you are a federal employee3. You have not abandoned the area in whichthat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct participating in a federal crime investigation orboth your historical place of lodging andany expenses you have for meals and lodging prosecution, you are not subject to the one-yearyour claimed main home are located; youthere. However, when you return to work in rule. This means you may be able to deducthave a member or members of your familyPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home travel expenses even if you are away from yourliving at your main home; or you often useeven though you stay at your family home. You tax home for more than one year.that home for lodging.can deduct the cost of your round trip between For you to qualify, the Attorney General mustBaltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deductIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax homecertify that you are traveling:your part of your family’s living expenses foris the home where you regularly live. If you
meals and lodging while you are living and work- • For the federal government,satisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
ing in Pittsburgh. home depending on all the facts and circum-• In a temporary duty status, andstances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are an
• To investigate, prosecute, or provide sup-itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workTax Home port services for the investigation or prose-and you cannot deduct travel expenses.
cution of, a federal crime.To determine whether you are traveling away
Example. You are single and live in Bostonfrom home, you must first determine the location You can deduct your otherwise allowable travelin an apartment you rent. You have worked forof your tax home. expenses throughout the period of certification.your employer in Boston for a number of years.Generally, your tax home is your regular
Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-place of business or post of duty, regardless of Determining temporary or indefinite.Youtive training program. You do not expect to re-where you maintain your family home. It in- must determine whether your assignment isturn to work in Boston after you complete yourcludes the entire city or general area in which temporary or indefinite when you start work. Iftraining.your business or work is located. you expect an assignment or job to last for one
If you have more than one regular place ofDuring your training, you do not do any workyear or less, it is temporary unless there are
business, your tax home is your main place ofin Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andfacts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
business. See Main place of business or work,on-the-job training throughout the United States.An assignment or job that is initially temporary
later. You keep your apartment in Boston and return tomay become indefinite due to changed circum-
If you do not have a regular or a main placeit frequently. You use your apartment to conductstances. A series of assignments to the same
of business because of the nature of your work,your personal business. You also keep up yourlocation, all for short periods but that together
then your tax home may be the place where youcommunity contacts in Boston. When you com-cover a long period, may be considered an in-
regularly live. See No main place of business orplete your training, you are transferred to Losdefinite assignment.
work, later. Angeles.
 If you do not have a regular place of busi-You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didGoing home on days off. If you go back toness or post of duty and there is no place wherenot work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-your tax home from a temporary assignment onyou regularly live, you are considered an itiner-cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youyour days off, you are not considered away fromant (a transient) and your tax home is whereveralso satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-home while you are in your hometown. Youyou work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim adon your apartment in Boston as your maincannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-travel expense deduction because you are home, you kept your community contacts, anding there. However, you can deduct your travelnever considered to be traveling away fromyou frequently returned to live in your apartment.expenses, including meals and lodging, whilehome. You have a tax home in Boston. traveling between your temporary place of work
and your tax home. You can claim these ex-Main place of business or work.If you have penses up to the amount it would have cost youTemporary Assignmentmore than one place of business or work, con- to stay at your temporary place of work.sider the following when determining which oneor Job If you keep your hotel room during your visitis your main place of business or work. home, you can deduct the cost of your hotelYou may regularly work at your tax home and• The total time you ordinarily spend in each room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-also work at another location. It may not beplace. penses of returning home up to the amount youpractical to return to your tax home from thiswould have spent for meals had you stayed at• The level of your business activity in eachother location at the end of each work day.your temporary place of work.place.
• Whether your income from each place isTemporary assignment vs. indefinite Probationary work period.If you take a jobsignificant or insignificant. assignment. If your assignment or job awaythat requires you to move, with the understand-from your main place of work is temporary, youring that you will keep the job if your work is
tax home does not change. You are consideredsatisfactory during a probationary period, the jobExample. You live in Cincinnati where youto be away from home for the whole period youis indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourhave a seasonal job for 8 months each year andare away from your main place of work. You canexpenses for meals and lodging during the pro-earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months indeduct your travel expenses if they otherwisebationary period.Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporaryCincinnati is your main place of work becauseassignment in a single location is one that isyou spend most of your time there and earn What Travel Expenses Arerealistically expected to last (and does in factmost of your income there. last) for one year or less. Deductible?
However, if your assignment or job is indefi-No main place of business or work. You
Once you have determined that you are travel-nite, the location of the assignment or job be-may have a tax home even if you do not have a
ing away from your tax home, you can determineregular or main place of business or work. Your comes your new tax home and you cannot
what travel expenses are deductible.tax home may be the home where you regularly deduct your travel expenses while there. An
live. assignment or job in a single location is consid- You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-
ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastpenses you have when you travel away fromFactors used to determine tax home.If for more than one year, whether or not it actuallyhome on business. The type of expense you canyou do not have a regular or main place oflasts for more than one year. deduct depends on the facts and your circum-business or work, use the following three factors stances.If your assignment is indefinite, you mustto determine where your tax home is. include in your income any amounts you receiveTable 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you
from your employer for living expenses, even ifmay be able to deduct. You may have other1. You perform part of your business in the
they are called travel allowances and you ac-deductible travel expenses that are not coveredarea of your main home and use that
count to your employer for them. You may bethere, depending on the facts and your circum-home for lodging while doing business in
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your newstances.the area.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 167

Page 170 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-Table 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
sisting in entertaining customers, are not This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you enough to make the expenses deductible.travel away from home for business purposes.
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is
not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types
IF you have
notes, performs similar services, and accompa-expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-
formance of these services does not establish
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and
that her presence on the trip is necessary to theyour business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses areyou are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similarnot deductible.program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. AWater Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct thePublication 463 for additional rules and limits. total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he usestaxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take youpublic transportation, he can deduct only hisbus, and airport between: fare.limousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and
Meals and Incidental Expenses• The hotel and the work location of your customers or
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporaryYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of thework location. following situations.
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your• It is necessary for you to stop for substan-
shipping regular and temporary work locations. tial sleep or rest to properly perform your
duties while traveling away from home oncar operating and maintaining your car when traveling away frombusiness.
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the• The meal is business-related entertain-standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls andment.parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,
you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.Business-related entertainment is discussed
under Entertainment Expenses, later. The fol-lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight orlowing discussion deals only with meals (andlong enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properlyincidental expenses) that are not business-re-perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,lated entertainment.
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and incidental
Lavish or extravagant.You cannot deductexpenses for additional rules and limits.
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
gant. An expense is not considered lavish orcleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includesand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-
business communication by fax machine or other lowed merely because they are more than a
fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-communication devices.
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
50% limit on meals.You can figure your meal
expenses using either of the following methods.other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
business travel. These expenses might include transportation• Actual cost.
to or from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees,• The standard meal allowance.computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house
trailer.
Both of these methods are explained below. But,
regardless of the method you use, you generally
can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
of your meals.When you travel away from home on Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
business, you should keep records of penses of someone who goes with you if thatIf you are reimbursed for the cost of your
all the expenses you have and any person:
RECORDS
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on
advances you receive from your employer. You whether your employer’s reimbursement plan
1. Is your employee,can use a log, diary, notebook, or any other was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
written record to keep track of your expenses. not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether2. Has a bona fide business purpose for theThe types of expenses you need to record, the unreimbursed meal expense is for businesstravel, andalong with supporting documentation, are de- travel or business entertainment. The 50% limit3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct thescribed in Table 26-2, later. is explained later under Entertainment Ex-travel expenses. penses. Accountable and nonaccountable plansSeparating costs.If you have one expense are discussed later under Reimbursements.that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,Business associate.If a business associ-
and other services (such as lodging or transpor- Actual cost.You can use the actual cost ofate travels with you and meets the conditions in
tation), you must allocate that expense between your meals to figure the amount of your expense(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost before reimbursement and application of theexpenses you have for that person. A business
of other services. You must have a reasonable 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, youassociate is someone with whom you could rea-
basis for making this allocation. For example, must keep records of your actual cost.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A
you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-business associate can be a current or prospec-Standard meal allowance. Generally, youcludes one or more meals in its room charge.tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,can use the “standard meal allowance” methodemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-Travel expenses for another individual.If a as an alternative to the actual cost method. Itsor.spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with allows you to use a set amount for your daily
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to aBona fide business purpose.A bona fide meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), instead
business convention, you generally cannot de- business purpose exists if you can prove a real of keeping records of your actual costs. The set
duct his or her travel expenses. business purpose for the individual’s presence. amount varies depending on where and when
Page 168 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 171 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you travel. In this chapter, “standard meal allow- rate. For travel in 2005, the rate for most small you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use
ance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis- localities in the United States is $31 a day from the special rate for any trip, you must use the
cussed later under Amount of standard meal January 1 through September 30, 2005, and special rate (and not use the regular standard
allowance. If you use the standard meal allow- $39 a day from October 1 through December 31, meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that
ance, you still must keep records to prove the 2005. year.
time, place, and business purpose of your travel.Most major cities and many other localities in
Travel for days you depart and return.ForSee Recordkeeping, later. the United States are designated as high-cost
both the day you depart for and the day youareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-Incidental expenses.The term “incidental return from a business trip, you must prorate thelowances. Locations qualifying for these ratesexpenses” means: standard meal allowance (figure a reducedare listed in Publication 1542 which is available
amount for each day). You can do so by one of
• Fees and tips given to porters, baggageon the Internet at www.irs.gov.
two methods.carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards You can also find this information onor stewardesses and others on ships, and • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-the Internet at www.gsa.gov. Click onhotel servants in foreign countries, dard meal allowance.“Per Diem Rates,” then select “2005”
• Transportation between places of lodgingfor the period January 1, 2005 — September • Method 2: You can prorate using anyor business and places where meals are30, 2005, and select “2006” for the period Octo-method that you consistently apply andtaken, if suitable meals can be obtained atber 1, 2005 — December 31, 2005. However, that is in accordance with reasonable busi-the temporary duty site, and you can apply the rates in effect before Octoberness practice.1, 2005, for expenses of all travel within the• Mailing costs associated with filing travelUnited States for 2005 instead of the updatedvouchers and payment of employer-spon- Example. Jen is employed in New Orleansrates. You must consistently use either the ratessored charge card billings. as a convention planner. In March, her employerfor the first 9 months for all of 2005 or the
Incidental expenses do not include expenses for sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, toupdated rates for the period of October 1, 2005,
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg- attend a planning seminar. She left her home inthrough December 31, 2005.
ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday andIf you travel to more than one location in one
calls. arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Afterday, use the rate in effect for the area where you
spending two nights there, she flew back to Newstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-Incidental expenses only method. You Orleans on Friday and arrived back home attation industry, however, see Special rate forcan use an optional method (instead of actual 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amounttransportation workers, later.cost) for deducting incidental expenses only. to cover her expenses and included it with herThe amount of the deduction is $3 a day forStandard meal allowance for areas outsidewages.incidental expenses paid or incurred for travelthe continental United States. The standard Under Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days ofaway from home in 2005. You can use this meal allowance rates do not apply to travel inthe standard meal allowance for Washington,method only if you did not pay or incur any mealAlaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsideDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andexpenses. You cannot use this method on anythe continental United States. The federal perFriday (the days she departed and returned),day that you use the standard meal allowance.diem rates for these locations are publishedand the full daily rate for Thursday.monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-Federal employees should refer to the Under Method 2, Jen could also use anylowances for Foreign Areas.Federal Travel Regulations at method that she applies consistently and that is
www.gsa.gov. Click on “Per Diem in accordance with reasonable business prac-CAUTION
!
You can access foreign per diem
Rates,” then on “Federal Travel Regulation tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of therates at: www.state.gov/m/a/als/
(FTR) Overview” for changes affecting claims standard meal allowance even though a federalprdm.
for reimbursement of these expenses. employee would have to use method 1 and be
limited to only 21/2 days.50% limit may apply.If you use the stan- Your employer may have these rates
dard meal allowance method for meal expenses available, or you can purchase the
and you are not reimbursed or you are reim- Travel in thepublication from the:
bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can United Statesgenerally deduct only 50% of the standard mealSuperintendent of Documentsallowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-U.S. Government Printing Office The following discussion applies to travel in thecountable plan and you are deducting amountsP.O. Box 371954 United States. For this purpose, the Unitedthat are more than your reimbursements, you Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 States includes the 50 states and the District ofcan deduct only 50% of the excess amount. The Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-You can also order it by calling the50% limit is explained later under Entertainment penses depends on how much of your trip wasGovernment Printing Office atExpenses. Accountable and nonaccountable business related and on how much of your trip1-202-512-1800 (not a toll-free num-plans are discussed later under Reimburse- occurred within the United States. See Part ofber).ments. Trip Outside the United States, later.
Special rate for transportation workers.There is no optional standard lodging
You can use a special standard meal allowanceamount similar to the standard meal
if you work in the transportation industry. Youallowance. Your allowable lodging ex- Trip Primarily for BusinessCAUTION
!
are in the transportation industry if your work:pense deduction is your actual cost.
You can deduct all your travel expenses if your• Directly involves moving people or goodsWho can use the standard meal allowance. trip was entirely business related. If your trip wasby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orYou can use the standard meal allowance primarily for business and, while at your busi-truck, andwhether you are an employee or self-employed, ness destination, you extended your stay for aand whether or not you are reimbursed for your vacation, made a personal side trip, or had other• Regularly requires you to travel away fromtraveling expenses. personal activities, you can deduct yourhome and, during any single trip, usually
business-related travel expenses. These ex-involves travel to areas eligible for differ-Use of the standard meal allowance for other penses include the travel costs of getting to andent standard meal allowance rates.travel.You can use the standard meal allow- from your business destination and anyance to figure your meal expenses when youIf this applies to you, you can claim a standardbusiness-related expenses at your businesstravel in connection with investment and othermeal allowance of $41 a day ($46 for traveldestination.income-producing property. You can also use itoutside the continental United States) from Jan-
to figure your meal expenses when you travel foruary 1 through September 30, 2005, and $52 aExample. You work in Atlanta and take aqualifying educational purposes. You cannotday ($58 for travel outside the continental Unitedbusiness trip to New Orleans. On your wayuse the standard meal allowance to figure theStates) from October 1 through December 31,home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.cost of your meals when you travel for medical2005. You spend $1,070 for the 9 days you are awayor charitable purposes. Using the special rate for transportation work- from home for travel, meals, lodging, and other
Amount of standard meal allowance. The ers eliminates the need for you to determine the travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE standard meal allowance for every area where bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 169

Page 172 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your total cost would have been $920. You can includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-Travel Primarily for Business
bia.deduct $920 for your trip, including the cost of
If you travel outside the United States primarilyHow much of your travel expenses you canround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-
for business but spend some of your time ondeduct depends in part upon how much of yourans. The deduction for your meals is subject to
nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de-trip outside the United States was business re-the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
duct all of your travel expenses. You can onlylated.
deduct the business portion of your cost of get-See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-
ting to and from your destination. You musttion on luxury water travel.Trip Primarily for
allocate the costs between your business andPersonal Reasons
nonbusiness activities to determine your de-
ductible amount. These travel allocation rulesIf your trip was primarily for personal reasons,Travel Entirely for Business
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463.such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is aor Considered Entirely
nondeductible personal expense. However, youfor Business You do not have to allocate yourcan deduct any expenses you have while at your travel expense deduction if you meetdestination that are directly related to your busi-You can deduct all your travel expenses of get- one of the four exceptions listed ear-
TIP
ness. ting to and from your business destination if yourlier under Travel considered entirely for busi-trip is entirely for business or considered entirely   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be ness. In those cases, you can deduct the totalfor business.a vacation even if the promoter advertises that it cost of getting to and from your destination.is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-Travel entirely for business.If you traveldental business activities during a trip, such asoutside the United States and you spend theviewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing Travel Primarily for Personalentire time on business activities, you can de-with general subjects, will not change what isduct all of your travel expenses. Reasonsreally a vacation into a business trip.
Travel considered entirely for business. If you travel outside the United States primarily
Even if you did not spend your entire time onfor vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
Part of Trip Outside business activities, your trip is considered en-tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal
tirely for business if you meet at least one of thethe United States expense. If you spend some time attending brief
following four exceptions. professional seminars or a continuing educationIf part of your trip is outside the United States, program, you can deduct your registration feesException 1 - No substantial control.use the rules described later under Travel and other expenses you have that are directlyYour trip is considered entirely for business ifOutside the United States for that part of the trip. related to your business.you did not have substantial control over arrang-For the part of your trip that is inside the Uniteding the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofStates, use the rules for travel in the Unitedyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you haveConventionsStates. Travel outside the United States doessubstantial control over arranging your trip.not include travel from one point in the UnitedYou do not have substantial control overYou can deduct your travel expenses when youStates to another point in the United States. Theyour trip if you: attend a convention if you can show that yourfollowing discussion can help you determine attendance benefits your trade or business. You• Are an employee who was reimbursed orwhether your trip was entirely within the United cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-paid a travel expense allowance,States. ily.
• Are not related to your employer, and  If the convention is for investment, political,Public transportation.If you travel by public
social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade• Are not a managing executive.transportation, any place in the United States
or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
“Related to your employer” is defined later inpoint in the United States. Once the vehicle Your appointment or election as athis chapter under Related to employer.leaves the last scheduled stop in the United delegate does not, in itself, determineA “managing executive” is an employee whoStates on its way to a point outside the United whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
has the authority and responsibility, without be-States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside penses. You can deduct your travel expensesing subject to the veto of another, to decide onthe United States. only if your attendance is connected to your ownthe need for the business travel. trade or business. A self-employed person generally has sub-Example. You fly from New York to Puerto
stantial control over arranging business trips.Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return Convention agenda. The convention agenda
to New York nonstop. The flight from New York or program generally shows the purpose of theException 2 - Outside United States noto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight convention. You can show your attendance atmore than a week. Your trip is consideredfrom Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United the convention benefits your trade or businessentirely for business if you were outside theStates. Because there are no scheduled stops by comparing the agenda with the official dutiesUnited States for a week or less, combiningbetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of the and responsibilities of your position. The agendabusiness and nonbusiness activities. One weekreturn trip is outside the United States. does not have to deal specifically with your offi-means seven consecutive days. In counting the
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughdays, do not count the day you leave the UnitedPrivate car.Travel by private car in the United if the agenda is so related to your position that itStates, but do count the day you return to theStates is travel between points in the United shows your attendance was for business pur-United States.States, even when you are on your way to a poses.Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time ondestination outside the United States.
personal activities.Your trip is consideredConventions held outside the North Ameri-entirely for business if:Example. You travel by car from Denver to can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver information on conventions held outside the• You were outside the United States forto the border and from the border back to Den- North American area.more than a week, andver is travel in the United States, and the rules in
• You spent less than 25% of the total timethis section apply. The rules under Travel
you were outside the United States onOutside the United States apply to your trip from
nonbusiness activities.the border to Mexico City and back to the border. EntertainmentFor this purpose, count both the day your trip
began and the day it ended.Travel Outside Expenses
Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-the United States
You may be able to deduct business-relatederation. Your trip is considered entirely for
entertainment expenses you have for entertain-If any part of your business travel is outside thebusiness if you can establish that a personal
ing a client, customer, or employee.United States, some of your deductions for thevacation was not a major consideration, even if
cost of getting to and from your destination may You can deduct entertainment expensesyou have substantial control over arranging the
be limited. For this purpose, the United States only if they are both ordinary and necessarytrip.
Page 170 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 173 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(defined earlier in the Introduction) and meet other services (such as lodging or transporta-Trade association meetings. You can de-
one of the following tests. duct entertainment expenses that are directlytion), you must allocate that expense between
related to, and necessary for, attending busi-the cost of entertainment and the cost of other• Directly-related test. ness meetings or conventions of certain exemptservices. You must have a reasonable basis for
organizations if the expenses of your attend-• Associated test. making this allocation. For example, you mustance are related to your active trade or busi-allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 of ness. These organizations include businesstainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourPublication 463. leagues, chambers of commerce, real estateroom charge. boards, trade associations, and professional as-The amount you can deduct for enter- sociations.A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter-tainment expenses may be limited.tainment includes the cost of a meal you provideGenerally, you can deduct only 50% Additional information.For more informationCAUTION
!
to a customer or client, whether the meal is aof your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. on entertainment expenses, including discus-part of other entertainment or by itself. A mealThis limit is discussed later under 50% Limit. sions of the directly-related and associatedexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,tests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463.
taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct anClub dues and membership fees. You can-
entertainment-related meal, you or your em-not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for 50% Limitmembership in any club organized for: ployee must be present when the food or bever-
ages are provided. In general, you can deduct only 50% of your• Business,
business-related meal and entertainment ex-You cannot claim the cost of your• Pleasure, penses. (If you are subject to the Department ofmeal both as an entertainment ex-
Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, you• Recreation, or pense and as a travel expense.CAUTION
!
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals• Other social purpose. subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)Taking turns paying for meals or The 50% limit applies to employees or theirThis rule applies to any membership organiza-entertainment.If a group of business ac- employers, and to self-employed persons (in-tion if one of its principal purposes is either:quaintances take turns picking up each others’cluding independent contractors) or their clients,• To conduct entertainment activities formeal or entertainment checks without regard todepending on whether the expenses are reim-members or their guests, or whether any business purposes are served, nobursed.
member of the group can deduct any part of the  Figure 26-A summarizes the general rules• To provide members or their guests with
expense. explained in this section.access to entertainment facilities.
The purposes and activities of a club, not its
name, will determine whether or not you can
deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
to:
• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs,
• Airline clubs,
• Hotel clubs, and
• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be
conducive to business discussions.
Entertainment.  Entertainment includes any
activity generally considered to provide enter-
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
ing, vacation, and similar trips.
 You cannot deduct expenses for entertain-
ment that are lavish or extravagant. If you buy a
ticket to an entertainment event for a client, you
generally cannot deduct more than the face
value of the ticket, even if you paid a higher
price.
Gift or entertainment.Any item that might
be considered either a gift or entertainment gen-
erally will be considered entertainment. How-
ever, if you give a customer packaged food or
beverages that you intend the customer to use
at a later date, treat it as a gift.
If you give a customer tickets to a theater
performance or sporting event and you do not go
with the customer to the performance or event,
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as
either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to
your advantage.
If you go with the customer to the event, you
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
to treat the tickets as a gift.
Separating costs.If you have one expense
that includes the costs of entertainment, and
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 171

Page 174 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The 50% limit applies to business meals orIndividuals subject to “hours of service”ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
entertainment expenses you have while: limits.You can deduct a higher percentage ofpackaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
your meal expenses while traveling away fromvalue of the basket is substantial compared to• Traveling away from home (whether eat-your tax home if the meals take place during orthe value of the fruit.ing alone or with others) on business,incident to any period subject to the Department
• Entertaining customers at your place ofof Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. TheExceptions. The following items are not con-
business, a restaurant, or other location,percentage is 70% for 2005, and it graduallysidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. 
or increases to 80% by the year 2008.
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:Individuals subject to the Department of• Attending a business convention or recep-
Transportation’s “hours of service” limits includetion, business meeting, or business lunch- a. Has your name clearly and permanentlythe following persons.eon at a club. imprinted on the gift, and
• Certain air transportation workers (such asb. Is one of a number of identical itemspilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the you widely distribute. Examples includecontrol tower operators) who are under50% limit include: pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andFederal Aviation Administration regula- cases.• Taxes and tips relating to a business mealtions.or entertainment activity,
• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional• Cover charges for admission to a night- who are under Department of Transporta- material to be used on the business prem-club, tion regulations. ises of the recipient.
• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-dinner or cocktail party, and neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
ers, and control operations personnel)• Amounts paid for parking at a sports considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis-arena. ally will be considered entertainment. However,
tration regulations. if you give a customer packaged food or bever-However, the cost of transportation to and from
ages that you intend the customer to use at a• Certain merchant mariners who are undera business meal or a business-related entertain-
later date, treat it as a gift.Coast Guard regulations.ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
 If you give a customer tickets to a theater
performance or sporting event and you do not goApplication of 50% limit.The 50% limit on Other exceptions.There are also exceptionswith the customer to the performance or event,meal and entertainment expenses applies if thefor the self-employed, advertising expenses,you have a choice. You can treat the cost of theexpense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-selling meals or entertainment, and charitabletickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-ered by one of the exceptions discussed later insports events. These are discussed in Publica-ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.this section. tion 463.The 50% limit also applies to certain meal If you go with the customer to the event, you
and entertainment expenses that are not must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
business-related. It applies to meal and enter- ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
tainment expenses incurred for the production of to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Gift Expensesincome, including rental or royalty income. It
also applies to the cost of meals included in
If you give gifts in the course of your trade ordeductible educational expenses.
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.When to apply the 50% limit.You apply the TransportationThis section explains the limits and rules for50% limit after determining the amount thatdeducting the costs of gifts.would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first Expenses
have to determine the amount of meal and en-$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25tertainment expenses that would be deductible This section discusses expenses you can de-for business gifts you give directly or indirectly tounder the other rules discussed in this chapter. duct for business transportation when you areany one person during your tax year. A gift to anot traveling away from home as defined earliercompany that is intended for the eventual per-Example 1. You spend $100 for a under Travel Expenses. These expenses in-sonal use or benefit of a particular person or abusiness-related meal. If $40 of that amount is clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus,limited class of people will be considered annot allowable because it is lavish and extrava- taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintainingindirect gift to that particular person or to thegant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50% your car.individuals within that class of people who re-limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30 Transportation expenses include the ordi-ceive the gift.(.50 × $60). nary and necessary costs of all of the following.If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s
family, the gift is generally considered to be anExample 2. You purchase two tickets to a • Getting from one workplace to another inindirect gift to the customer. This rule does notconcert and give them to a client. You pur- the course of your business or professionapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You when you are traveling within your taxness connection with that family member andpaid $150 for the two tickets, which had a face home. (Tax home is defined earlier underthe gift is not intended for the customer’s even-value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction Travel Expenses.)tual use.cannot be more than $60 (.50 × $120). • Visiting clients or customers.If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not• Going to a business meeting away from
matter whether you have separate businesses,Exceptions to the 50% Limit your regular workplace.
are separately employed, or whether each of
• Getting from your home to a temporaryGenerally, business-related meal and entertain-you has an independent connection with the
workplace when you have one or morement expenses are subject to the 50% limit.recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
regular places of work. These temporaryFigure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
workplaces can be either within the arealimit applies to you. payer.
of your tax home or outside that area.Your meal or entertainment expense is not
subject to the 50% limit if the expense meetsIncidental costs.Incidental costs, such asTransportation expenses do not include ex-one of the following exceptions. engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,penses you have while traveling away from
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-Employee’s reimbursed expenses. If you
mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25penses, which are discussed earlier. However, ifare an employee, you are not subject to the 50%
limit. you use your car while traveling away fromlimit on expenses for which your employer reim-
home overnight, use the rules in this section toA cost is incidental only if it does not addburses you under an accountable plan. Account-
figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex-substantial value to the gift. For example, theable plans are discussed later under
penses, later.cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-Reimbursements.
Page 172 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 175 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
between your home and temporary work sites
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work.If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
duct more than the amount it would have cost
you to go directly from the first location to the
second.
Transportation expenses you have in going
between home and a part-time job on a day off
from your main job are commuting expenses.
You cannot deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.A meeting of an
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
business if the meeting is held on a day on which
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
expense of getting from one workplace to the
other as just discussed under Two places of
work.
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-
muting expense. However, you can deduct your
transportation expenses if the location of the
meeting is temporary and you have one or more
regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
itan area but not at any specific location and the
reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from
home in connection with your performance of
services as a member of the reserves, you may
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related
travel costs as an adjustment to income rather
than as an itemized deduction. See Armed
Forces reservists traveling more than 100 miles
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Neverdeductible
on
adayofffrom
regular
ormainjob
Deductibleif youhavea
regular or mainjob
at another location Alw
ays d
edu
ctib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
from home under Special Rules, later.
Illustration of transportation expenses. ployment is not temporary, regardless of
Commuting expenses. You cannot deductFigure 26-B illustrates the rules for when you whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,can deduct transportation expenses when youIf employment at a work location initially isor of driving a car between your home and yourhave a regular or main job away from yourrealistically expected to last for 1 year or less,main or regular place of work. These costs arehome. You may want to refer to it when decidingbut at some later date the employment is realisti-personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-whether you can deduct your transportation ex-cally expected to last more than 1 year, thatduct commuting expenses no matter how farpenses. employment will be treated as temporary (un-your home is from your regular place of work.less there are facts and circumstances thatYou cannot deduct commuting expenses even ifTemporary work location.If you have one orwould indicate otherwise) until your expectationyou work during the commuting trip.more regular work locations away from yourchanges. It will not be treated as temporary after
home and you commute to a temporary work the date you determine it will last more than 1Example. You had a telephone installed inlocation in the same trade or business, you canyear. your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
deduct the expenses of the daily round-tripIf the temporary work location is beyond themake business calls while commuting to and
transportation between your home and the tem-general area of your regular place of work andfrom work. Sometimes business associates ride
porary location, regardless of distance. you stay overnight, you are traveling away from with you to and from work, and you have a
If your employment at a work location is business discussion in the car. These activitieshome. You may have deductible travel ex-
do not change the trip from personal to busi-realistically expected to last (and does in factpenses as discussed earlier in this chapter.
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-last) for one year or less, the employment is
penses.temporary unless there are facts and circum-No regular place of work.If you have no
stances that would indicate otherwise. regular place of work but ordinarily work in theParking fees.Fees you pay to park your car
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-If your employment at a work location is at your place of business are nondeductible
duct daily transportation costs between homerealistically expected to last for more than 1 year commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
and a temporary work site outside that metropol-or if there is no realistic expectation that the duct business-related parking fees when visiting
itan area.employment will last for 1 year or less, the em- a customer or client.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 173

Page 176 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advertising display on car.Putting display ally can use one of the two following methods to whether any reimbursement is more or less than
material that advertises your business on your figure your deductible expenses. the amount figured using the standard mileage
car does not change the use of your car from rate. See Reimbursements under How To Re-
• Standard mileage rate.personal use to business use. If you use this car port, later.
for commuting or other personal uses, you still• Actual car expenses.
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you
want to use the standard mileage rate for a carIf you use actual car expenses to figure yourCar pools. You cannot deduct the cost of you own, you must choose to use it in the firstdeduction for a car you lease, there are rulesusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not year the car is available for use in your business.that affect the amount of your lease paymentsinclude payments you receive from the passen- Then in later years, you can choose to use eitherthat you can deduct. See Leasing a car undergers in your income. These payments are con- the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.Actual Car Expenses, later.sidered reimbursements of your expenses. If you want to use the standard mileage rateIn this chapter, “car” includes a van, pickup,However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, for a car you lease, you must use it for the entireor panel truck.you must include payments from passengers in lease period. For leases that began on or beforeyour income. You can then deduct your car You may be entitled to a tax credit forDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateexpenses (using the rules in this chapter). an electric vehicle (see chapter 37) ormust be used for the entire portion of the leasea deduction from gross income for a
TIP
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling period (including renewals) that is after 1997.part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle that youtools or instruments in your car while commuting If you choose to use the standard mileageplace in service during the year. The vehicleto and from work does not make your car ex- rate, you are considered to have chosen not tomust meet certain requirements, and you do notpenses deductible. However, you can deduct use the depreciation methods under the Modi-have to use it in your business to qualify for theany additional costs you have for hauling tools or fied Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemcredit or the deduction. For more information,instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow (MACRS). This is because the standard mileagesee chapter 12 of Publication 535.with your car). rate includes an allowance for depreciation that
is not expressed in terms of years. If you changeUnion members’ trips from a union hall.If Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailto the actual expenses method in a later year,you get your work assignments at a union hallcarrier, you may be able to treat the amount ofbut before your car is fully depreciated, you haveand then go to your place of work, the costs ofqualified reimbursement you received as theto estimate the remaining useful life of the cargetting from the union hall to your place of workamount of your allowable expense. Because theand use straight line depreciation. For more in-are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-qualified reimbursement is treated as paid underformation about depreciation included in thethough you need the union to get your workan accountable plan, your employer should notstandard mileage rate, see the exception inassignments, you are employed where you include the amount of reimbursement in yourMethods of depreciation under Depreciation De-work, not where the union hall is located.income. duction in chapter 4 of Publication 463.
If your vehicle expenses are more than theOffice in the home.If you have an office in Standard mileage rate not allowed. Youamount of your reimbursement, you can deductyour home that qualifies as a principal place of cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-business, you can deduct your daily transporta-duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),tion costs between your home and another workcomplete Form 2106 and attach it to your Formlocation in the same trade or business. (See • Use five or more cars at the same time (as1040.chapter 28 for information on determining if your in fleet operations),A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-home office qualifies as a principal place ofbursement you receive that meets both of the• Claimed a depreciation deduction for thebusiness.) following conditions. car using any method other than straight
line depreciation,• It is given as an equipment maintenanceExamples of deductible transportation.The
allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.following examples show when you can deduct • Claimed a section 179 deduction on the
Postal Service.transportation expenses based on the location car,
of your work and your home. • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-• Claimed the special depreciation allow-
lective bargaining agreement. Any later ance on the car,Example 1. You regularly work in an officeagreement cannot increase the qualifiedin the city where you live. Your employer sends • Claimed actual car expenses after 1997reimbursement amount by more than theyou to a one-week training session at a different for a car you leased, orrate of inflation.office in the same city. You travel directly from • Are a rural mail carrier who received aSee your employer for information on your reim-your home to the training location and return qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailbursement.each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily carriers, earlier.)round-trip transportation between your home
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-and the training location. Five or more cars.If you own or lease fiveceived a qualified reimbursement,or more cars that are used for business at theyou cannot use the standard mileageExample 2. Your principal place of businessCAUTION
!
same time, you cannot use the standard mile-rate.is in your home. You can deduct the cost of age rate for the business use of any car. How-round-trip transportation between your qualify- ever, you may be able to deduct your actualing home office and your client’s or customer’s expenses for operating each of the cars in yourStandard Mileage Rateplace of business. business. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4
of Publication 463 for information on how toYou may be able to use the standard mileageExample 3. You have no regular office, and figure your deduction.rate to figure the deductible costs of operatingyou do not have an office in your home. In this You are not using five or more cars for busi-your car for business purposes. For 2005, thecase, the location of your first business contact ness at the same time if you alternate using (usestandard mileage rate for each mile of businessis considered your office. Transportation ex- at different times) the cars for business.use is:penses between your home and this first contact
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-• 401/2 cents per mile for the period JanuaryParking fees and tolls.In addition to usingportation expenses between your last business1 through August 31, 2005, and the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anycontact and your home are also nondeductible business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parking• 481/2 cents per mile for the period Septem-commuting expenses. Although you cannot de- fees that you pay to park your car at your placeber 1 through December 31, 2005.duct the costs of these first and last trips, you of work are nondeductible commuting ex-can deduct the costs of going from one client or penses.)customer to another. If you use the standard mileage rate
for a year, you cannot deduct your
actual car expenses for that year, but
CAUTION
!Car Expenses Actual Car Expensessee Parking fees and tolls, later.
If you use your car for business purposes, you You generally can use the standard mileage If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you
may be able to deduct car expenses. You gener- rate whether or not you are reimbursed and may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
Page 174 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 177 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you qualify to use both methods,Leasing a car.If you lease a car, truck, or van ilar record. You should also keep documentary
you may want to figure your deductionthat you use in your business, you can use the evidence that, together with your records, will
both ways to see which gives you astandard mileage rate or actual expenses to support each element of an expense.
TIP
larger deduction. figure your deductible car expense.
Documentary evidence. You generally mustDeductible payments. If you choose to usehave documentary evidence, such as receipts,Actual car expenses include: actual expenses, you can deduct the part ofcanceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-each lease payment that is for the use of the carDepreciation Lease Registration penses.in your business. You cannot deduct any part ofpayments fees Exception. Documentary evidence is nota lease payment that is for personal use of theGarage rent Licenses Repairs needed if any of the following conditions apply.car, such as commuting.Gas Oil Tires
You must spread any advance paymentsInsurance Parking fees Tolls • You have meals or lodging expensesover the entire lease period. You cannot deductwhile traveling away from home for whichany payments you make to buy a car, even if theBusiness and personal use.If you use your you account to your employer under anpayments are called lease payments.car for both business and personal purposes, accountable plan and you use a per diemIf you lease a car for 30 days or more, youyou must divide your expenses between busi- allowance method that includes mealsmay have to reduce your lease payment deduc-ness and personal use. You can divide your and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andtion by an “inclusion amount.” For information onexpense based on the miles driven for each per diem allowances are discussed laterreporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasingpurpose. under Reimbursements.)a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463.
• Your expense, other than lodging, is lessExample. You are a contractor and drive than $75.your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000
Sale, Trade-In, or Other Dispositionmiles for business use and 8,000 miles for per- • You have a transportation expense for
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ which a receipt is not readily available.If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your20,000) of the cost of operating your car as acar, you may have a taxable gain or a deductiblebusiness expense. Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-loss. This is true whether you used the standarddence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itmileage rate or actual car expenses to deductInterest on car loans.If you are an employee, shows the amount, date, place, and essentialthe business use of your car. Publication 544you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car character of the expense.has information on sales of property used in aloan. This interest is treated as personal interest For example, a hotel receipt is enough totrade or business, and details on how to reportand is not deductible. However, if you are support expenses for business travel if it has allthe disposition.self-employed and use your car in that business, of the following information.see chapter 5 of Publication 535.
• The name and location of the hotel.If you use a home equity loan to
• The dates you stayed there.purchase your car, you may be able to
Recordkeepingdeduct the interest. See chapter 23
TIP
• Separate amounts for charges such asfor more information. lodging, meals, and telephone calls.If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
portation expenses, you must be able to proveTaxes paid on your car.If you are an em- A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an(substantiate) certain elements of the expense.ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes expense for a business meal if it has all of theThis section discusses the records you need topaid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter following information.keep to prove these expenses.the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form
1040). (See chapter 22 for more information on • The name and location of the restaurant.If you keep timely and accurate rec-taxes.) If you are not an employee, see your ords, you will have support to show• The number of people served.form instructions for information on how to de- the IRS if your tax return is ever ex-RECORDS
duct personal property taxes paid on your car. • The date and amount of the expense.amined. You will also have proof of expenses
that your employer may require if you are reim-Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your If a charge is made for items other than food and
bursed under an accountable plan. These planscar are part of your car’s basis and are recov- beverages, the receipt must show that this is the
are discussed later under Reimbursements.ered through depreciation, discussed later. case.
However, to the extent the car is not used in your Canceled check. A canceled check, to-trade or business, you can choose to deduct theHow To Prove Expenses gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-nonbusiness part of the sales tax on your car as tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkpart of your state and local sales tax deductionTable 26-2 is a summary of records you need toby itself does not prove a business expenseon Schedule A (Form 1040). You can only prove each expense discussed in this chapter.without other evidence to show that it was for achoose to deduct state and local sales taxes asYou must be able to prove the elements listedbusiness purpose.an itemized deduction if you choose not to de-across the top portion of the chart. You prove
duct state and local income taxes. them by having the information and receiptsDuplicate information.You do not have to
(where needed) for the expenses listed in therecord information in your account book or otherFines and collateral.You cannot deduct finesfirst column. record that duplicates information shown on ayou pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola- receipt as long as your records and receiptsYou cannot deduct amounts that youtions. complement each other in an orderly manner.approximate or estimate.
You do not have to record amounts yourDepreciation and section 179 deductions. CAUTION
!
employer pays directly for any ticket or otherGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
travel item. However, if you charge these itemsimprovements, is a capital expense. BecauseYou should keep adequate records to prove
to your employer, through a credit card or other-the benefits last longer than one year, you gen-your expenses or have sufficient evidence that
wise, you must keep a record of the amountserally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-will support your own statement. You must gen-
you spend.ever, you can recover this cost through theerally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed byered adequate. This is because written evidence
Timely-kept records.You should record thesection 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), andis more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
elements of an expense or of a business use atdepreciation deductions. Depreciation allowsever, if you prepare a record in a computer
or near the time of the expense or use andyou to recover the cost over more than one yearmemory device with the aid of a logging pro-
support it with sufficient documentary evidence.by deducting part of it each year. The sectiongram, it is considered an adequate record.
A timely-kept record has more value than a179 deduction, and the depreciation deduction
statement prepared later when generally there isare discussed in more detail in chapter 4 of
a lack of accurate recall.Publication 463. What Are Adequate Records?
You do not need to write down the elementsGenerally, there are limits on these deduc-
of every expense on the day of the expense. Iftions. Special rules apply if you use your car You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
you maintain a log on a weekly basis which50% or less in your work or business. count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 175

Page 178 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose andIF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, daily meals for business.
traveler, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may beBusiness Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis.Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of thebusiness discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
accounts for use during the week, the log is Separating expenses. Each separate pay-What If I Have Incomplete
ment is generally considered a separate ex-considered a timely-kept record. Records? pense. For example, if you entertain a customerIf you give your employer, client, or customer or client at dinner and then go to the theater, theIf you do not have complete records to prove anan expense account statement, it can also be dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-element of an expense, then you must prove theconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if ets are two separate expenses. You must recordelement with:you copy it from your account book, diary, state- them separately in your records.ment of expense, or similar record. • Your own written or oral statement, con-
Combining items. You can make one dailytaining specific information about the ele-
entry in your record for reasonable categories ofment, andProving business purpose.You must gener- expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneally provide a written statement of the business• Other supporting evidence that is sufficientcalls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealspurpose of an expense. However, the degree ofto establish the element. should be in a separate category. You can in-proof varies according to the circumstances in clude tips for meal-related services with theeach case. If the business purpose of an ex- costs of the meals.Destroyed records. If you cannot produce apense is clear from the surrounding circum- Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-receipt because of reasons beyond your control,stances, then you do not need to give a written ing the course of a single event are considered ayou can prove a deduction by reconstructingexplanation. single expense. For example, if during entertain-your records or expenses. Reasons beyond ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately foryour control include fire, flood, and other casu-each serving of refreshments, the total expenseConfidential information.You do not need toalty. for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-put confidential information relating to an ele- pense.ment of a deductible expense (such as the
place, business purpose, or business relation-Separating and Combining Allocating total cost.If you can prove the
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re- total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Expenses
cord. However, you do have to record the not prove how much it cost for each person who
information elsewhere at or near the time of theThis section explains when expenses must beparticipated in the event, you may have to allo-
expense and have it available to fully prove thatkept separate and when expenses can be com-cate the total cost among you and your guests
element of the expense. bined. on a pro rata basis. An allocation would be
Page 176 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 179 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
needed, for example, if you did not have a busi- you must keep separate records for each busi-No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed
ness relationship with all of your guests. ness activity. Report your business expenses foror given an allowance for your expenses if you
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or Fare paid a salary or commission with the under-If your return is examined.If your return is(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report yourstanding that you will pay your own expenses. Inexamined, you may have to provide additionalbusiness expenses for your work as an em-this situation, you have no reimbursement orinformation to the IRS. This information could beployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussedallowance arrangement, and you do not have toneeded to clarify or to establish the accuracy ornext. read this section on reimbursements. Instead,reliability of information contained in your rec- see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,ords, statements, testimony, or documentaryEmployees. If you are an employee, you gen-for information on completing your tax return.evidence before a deduction is allowed. erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.Apenses. However, you can use the shorter FormHow Long To Keep reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofrangement is a system or plan that an employerRecords and Receipts the following conditions. uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
penses, advances, reimbursements, andYou must keep records as long as they may be• You are an employee deducting expenses
needed for the administration of any provision of amounts charged to the employer for employeeattributable to your job.
the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this business expenses. Arrangements include per• You were not reimbursed by your em-means you must keep your records that support diem and car allowances.ployer for your expenses (amounts in-your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years   A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are notfrom the date you file the income tax return on daily reimbursement your employer gives youconsidered reimbursements).which the deduction is claimed. A return filed for your lodging, meal, and incidental expenses
early is considered filed on the due date. For a• If you claim car expenses, you use thewhen you are away from home on business.more complete explanation, get Publication 583, standard mileage rate. (The term “incidental expenses” is defined ear-Starting a Business and Keeping Records. lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A carFor more information on how to report yourallowance is an amount your employer givesReimbursed for expenses. Employees who expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see you for the business use of your car.give their records and documentation to theirCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. Your employer should tell you what methodemployers and are reimbursed for their ex-
Gifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse-of reimbursement is used and what records youpenses generally do not have to keep copies of
ments (or the reimbursements were all includedmust provide.this information. However, you may have to
in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessprove your expenses if any of the following con-
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and theditions apply.
rules for certain individuals (such as performingAccountable Plans• You claim deductions for expenses thatartists) discussed later under Special Rules, doare more than reimbursements. To be an accountable plan, your employer’snot apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
reimbursement or allowance arrangement must2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de-• Your expenses are reimbursed under a
include all of the following rules.ductible gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule Anonaccountable plan.
(Form 1040).• Your employer does not use adequate ac- 1. Your expenses must have a business con-Statutory employees.   If you received acounting procedures to verify expense ac- nection — that is, you must have paid orForm W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box incounts. incurred deductible expenses while per-box 13 was checked, report your income and forming services as an employee of your• You are related to your employer, as de-expenses related to that income on Schedule Cemployer.fined later under Related to employer. or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form
2. You must adequately account to your em-2106 or 2106-EZ.See the next section, How To Report, for a ployer for these expenses within a reason-Statutory employees include full-time life in-discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac-surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- able period of time.counting, and nonaccountable plans. sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain3. You must return any excess reimburse-homeworkers.Additional information.Chapter 5 of Publi- ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-cation 463 has more information on recordkeep- If you are entitled to a reimbursementriod of time.ing, including examples. from your employer but you do not See Adequate Accounting and Returningclaim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
Excess Reimbursements, later.for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
An excess reimbursement or allowance isbursement applies.
any amount you are paid that is more than theHow To Report business-related expenses that you adequatelyReimbursement for personal expenses. If
accounted for to your employer.your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-This section explains where and how to report
ible personal expenses, such as for vacationThe definition of reasonable period of timethe expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
trips, your employer must report the reimburse-depends on the facts and circumstances of yourcusses reimbursements and how to treat them
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formsituation. However, regardless of the facts andunder accountable and nonaccountable plans. It
W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.circumstances of your situation, actions thatalso explains rules for independent contractors
take place within the times specified in the fol-and clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform-
lowing list will be treated as taking place within aing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certainReimbursements reasonable period of time.disabled employees. This section ends with an
illustration of how to report travel, entertainment,This section explains what to do when you re-• You receive an advance within 30 days ofgift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ. ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofthe time you have an expense.the employee business expenses discussed inSelf-employed. You must report your income • You adequately account for your ex-this chapter.and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form penses within 60 days after they were paidIf you received an advance, allowance, or1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- or incurred.reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do notport this amount and your expenses depends onuse Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in- • You return any excess reimbursementwhether the reimbursement was paid to youstructions for information on how to complete within 120 days after the expense wasunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountableyour tax return. You can also find information in paid or incurred.plan.Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in • You are given a periodic statement (atThis section explains the two types of plans,Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, if you are least quarterly) that asks you to either re-how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-a farmer. turn or adequately account for outstandinging the amount of your expenses, and the tax
advances and you comply within 120 daysBoth self-employed and an employee.  If treatment of your reimbursements and ex-
of the statement.you are both self-employed and an employee, penses.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 177

Page 180 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.If any reimbursement or other expense allowanceRegular federal per diem rate.The regular
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, federal per diem rate is the highest amount thatfor which you do not adequately account or that
your employer should not include any reim- the federal government will pay to its employeesis more than the amount for which you ac-
bursements in your income in box 1 of your for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (orcounted.
Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- meal and incidental expenses only) while they
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106. are traveling away from home in a particular
You have no deduction since your expenses area. The rates are different for different loca-
Per Diem and Car Allowances
and reimbursement are equal. tions. Your employer should have these rates
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-available. (Employers can get Publication 1542If your employer included reimburse-penses using a per diem or car allowance, youon the Internet, which gives the rates in thements in box 1 of your Form W-2 andcan generally use the allowance as proof of the continental United States for the current year.)you meet all the rules for accountable
TIP
amount of your expenses. A per diem or carplans, ask your employer for a corrected Form The standard meal allowance.The stan-allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-W-2. dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is thequirements for the amount of your expensesfederal rate for meals and incidental expensesonly if all of the following conditions apply.Accountable plan rules not met. Even (M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the
though you are reimbursed under an accounta- United States is $31 a day from January 1• Your employer reasonably limits paymentsble plan, some of your expenses may not meet through September 30, 2005, and $39 a dayof your expenses to those that are ordi-all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all from October 1 through December 31, 2005.nary and necessary in the conduct of thethree rules for accountable plans are treated as Most major cities and many other localities qual-trade or business.having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- ify for higher rates. The rates for all localities
• The allowance is similar in form to and notable plan (discussed later). within the continental United States are listed in
more than the federal rate (discussedPublication 1542. You can also find this informa-Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- later). tion on the Internet at www.gsa.gov.penses. You may be reimbursed under your You receive an allowance only for meals andemployer’s accountable plan for expenses re-• You prove the time (dates), place, andincidental expenses when your employer doeslated to that employer’s business, some of whichbusiness purpose of your expenses to one of the following.are deductible as employee business expensesyour employer (as explained in Table
and some of which are not deductible. The reim-26-2) within a reasonable period of time.• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inbursements you receive for the nondeductible kind).• You are not related to your employer (asexpenses do not meet rule (1) for accountabledefined next). If you are related to your• Reimburses you, based on your receipts,plans, and they are treated as paid under a employer, you must be able to prove your for the actual cost of your lodging.nonaccountable plan.
expenses to the IRS even if you have al-• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for yourready adequately accounted to your em-Example. Your employer’s plan reimburses lodging.ployer and returned any excessyou for travel expenses while away from home
• Does not have a reasonable belief thatreimbursement.on business and also for meals when you work
you had (or will have) lodging expenses,late at the office, even though you are not awayIf the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-such as when you stay with friends or rela-from home. The part of the arrangement thatance practices are not based on reasonably tives or sleep in the cab of your truck.reimburses you for the nondeductible mealsaccurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-when you work late at the office is treated as • Figures the allowance on a basis similar toognition of cost differences in different areas forpaid under a nonaccountable plan. that used in computing your compensa-per diem amounts), you will not be considered to
tion, such as number of hours worked orThe employer makes the decision have accounted to your employer. In this case,
miles traveled.whether to reimburse employees you must be able to prove your expenses to the
under an accountable plan or a IRS.
TIP
High-low rate.This is a simplified methodnonaccountable plan. If you are an employee
of computing the federal per diem rate for travelwho receives payments under a nonaccount-Related to employer.You are related to yourwithin the continental United States. It elimi-able plan, you cannot convert these amounts toemployer if: nates the need to keep a current list of the perpayments under an accountable plan by volun-
diem rate for each city.tarily accounting to your employer for the ex-1. Your employer is your brother or sister,
Under the high-low method, the per diempenses and voluntarily returning excess half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
amount for travel during January through Sep-reimbursements to the employer. tor, or lineal descendant,
tember of 2005 is $204 (including $46 for M&IE)2. Your employer is a corporation in whichfor certain high-cost locations. All other areas
you own, directly or indirectly, more thanhave a per diem amount of $129 (including $36Adequate Accounting 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orfor M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that which gives the areas eligible for the $204 per3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
you must adequately account to your employer diem amount under the high-low method for allduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,for your expenses. You adequately account by or part of this period.)a trust, and your employer.giving your employer a statement of expense, Effective October 1, 2005, the perYou may be considered to indirectly own stock,an account book, a diary, or a similar record in diem rate under this method for cer-for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in awhich you entered each expense at or near the tain high-cost locations increased toCAUTION
!
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust thattime you had it, along with documentary evi- $226 (including $58 for M&IE). The rate for allowns the stock or if a member of your family ordence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage, other locations increased to $141 (including $45your partner owns the stock.and other employee business expenses. (See for M&IE). However, an employer can continueTable 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enter to use the rates described in the preceding para-in your record and documents you need to proveThe federal rate.The federal rate can be fig-graph for the remainder of 2005 if those ratescertain expenses.) A per diem or car allowanceured using any one of the following methods.and locations are used consistently during Octo-satisfies the adequate accounting requirement ber, November, and December for all employ-under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car 1. For per diem amounts: ees. Employers who did not use the high-lowAllowances, later. method during the first 9 months of 2005 cannota. The regular federal per diem rate.You must account for all amounts you re- begin to use it before 2006. See Revenue Pro-ceived from your employer during the year asb. The standard meal allowance. cedure 2005-67 for more information. Also seeadvances, reimbursements, or allowances. This Publication 1542 on the Internet at www.irs.gov.c. The high-low rate.includes amounts you charged to your employer
by credit card or other method. You must give Prorating the standard meal allowance on
2. For car expenses:your employer the same type of records and partial days of travel.The standard meal al-
supporting information that you would have to lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youa. The standard mileage rate.give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction travel for part of a day, such as on the days you
on your return. You must pay back the amount of b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). depart and return, you must prorate the full-day
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- counts for the time (dates), place, and business your expenses, you have an excess reimburse-
ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or purpose of each trip. Her employer pays her ament.
the high-low rate. mileage allowance of 25 cents a mile. “Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-
You can use either of the following methodsSince Nicole’s $4,331 expenses computedriod of time” were discussed earlier.
to figure the federal M&IE for that day. under the standard mileage rate (6,500 miles ×
401/2 cents ($2,633) + 3,500 miles × 481/2 cents Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-1. Method 1: ($1,698)) are more than her $2,500 reimburse-vance if your employer provides you with an
ment (10,000 miles × 25 cents), she itemizes herexpense allowance before you actually have thea. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the deductions to claim the excess expenses. Ni-expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-standard meal allowance amount for cole completes Form 2106 (showing all of herpected to be no more than your expense. Underthat day. expenses and reimbursements) and enters an accountable plan, you are required to ade-
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the $1,831 ($4,331 − $2,500) as an itemized deduc-quately account to your employer for this ad-
standard meal allowance amount for tion. vance and to return any excess within athe preceding day. reasonable period of time.Allowance more than the federal rate.If
If you do not adequately account for or do notyour allowance is more than the federal rate,2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al- return any excess advance within a reasonableyour employer must include the allowancelowance using any method that you con-amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your period of time, the amount you do not accountsistently apply and that is in accordanceForm W-2. This amount is not taxable. However,for or return will be treated as having been paidwith reasonable business practice. the excess allowance will be included in box 1 ofunder a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
your Form W-2. You must report this part of yourThe standard mileage rate.This is a set Unproved amounts. If you do not proveallowance as if it were wage income.rate per mile that you can use to compute your that you actually traveled on each day for whichIf your actual expenses are less than ordeductible car expenses. For 2005, the standard you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-equal to the federal rate, you do not completemileage rate for the cost of operating your car is: ing the elements described in Table 26-2), youForm 2106 or claim any of your expenses onmust return this unproved amount of the travel• 401/2 cents per mile for the period Januaryyour return. advance within a reasonable period of time. If1 through August 31, 2005, and However, if your actual expenses are moreyou do not do this, the unproved amount will bethan the federal rate, you can complete Form• 481/2 cents per mile for the period Septem- considered paid under a nonaccountable plan2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youber 1 through December 31, 2005. (discussed later).must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements
Per diem allowance more than federal rate.up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of yourFixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an If your employer’s accountable plan pays you anForm W-2) and all your expenses. You shouldallowance your employer may use to reimburse allowance that is higher than the federal rate,be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.your car expenses. Under this method, your you do not have to return the difference betweenemployer pays an allowance that includes a the two rates for the period you can proveExample. Joe lives and works in Austin. Incombination of payments covering fixed and va- business-related travel expenses. However, theMay his employer sent him to San Diego for 4riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to difference will be reported as wages on yourdays and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotelcover your variable operating costs (such as Form W-2. This excess amount is consideredbill. The employer reimbursed Joe $60 a day forgas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your paid under a nonaccountable plan (discussedhis meals and incidental expenses. The federalfixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay- later).rate for San Diego is $51 a day.ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer
Joe can prove that his actual meal expenseschooses to use this method, your employer will Example. Your employer sends you on atotaled $325. His employer’s accountable planrequest the necessary records from you. 5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you awill not pay more than $60 a day for travel to San
$300 ($60 × 5 days) advance to cover yourDiego, so Joe does not give his employer theReporting your expenses with a per diem or
meals and incidental expenses. The federal perrecords that prove that he actually spent $325.car allowance.If your reimbursement is in the
diem for meals and incidental expenses forHowever, he does account for the time, place,form of an allowance received under an ac-
Phoenix is $47. Your trip lasts only 3 days.and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’scountable plan, the following facts affect your
Under your employer’s accountable plan, youonly business trip this year.reporting.
must return the $120 ($60 × 2 days) advance forJoe was reimbursed $240 ($60 × 4 days),• The federal rate. the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have towhich is $36 more than the federal rate of $204
return the $39 difference between the allowance($51 × 4 days). His employer includes the $36 as• Whether the allowance or your actual ex-
you received and the federal rate for Phoenixincome on Joe’s Form W-2 in box 1. His em-penses were more than the federal rate.
(($60 − $47) × 3 days). However, the $39 will beployer also enters $204 in box 12 of Joe’s FormThe following discussions explain where to re- reported on your Form W-2 as wages.W-2.port your expenses depending upon how the Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-amount of your allowance compares to the fed-ductible expenses. He enters the total of hiseral rate. Nonaccountable Plansactual expenses for the year ($325) on Form
Allowance less than or equal to the federal2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatA nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement orrate. If your allowance is less than or equal towere not included in his income ($204). His totalexpense allowance arrangement that does notthe federal rate, the allowance will not be in-deductible expense, before the 50% limit, ismeet one or more of the three rules listed earliercluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not$121. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-under Accountable Plans.need to report the related expenses or the allow-reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will
In addition, even if your employer has anance on your return if your expenses are equalinclude the balance, $61, as an itemized deduc-
accountable plan, the following payments will beto or less than the allowance. tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable However, if your actual expenses are more
plan.than your allowance, you can complete Form
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-Returning Excess • Excess reimbursements you fail to returnule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-Reimbursements to your employer.penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the
• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-Under an accountable plan, you are required tototal amount of your expenses and reimburse-
penses related to your employer’s busi-return any excess reimbursement or other ex-ments for the entire year. If you are using the
ness. See Reimbursement ofpense allowances for your business expensesstandard meal allowance or the standard mile-
nondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-to the person paying the reimbursement or al-age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.
countable Plans.lowance. Excess reimbursement means any
Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a year amount for which you did not adequately ac-
If you are not sure if the reimbursement orfor business (6,500 miles from January 1 count within a reasonable period of time. For
expense allowance arrangement is an account-through August 31, 2005, and 3,500 miles from example, if you received a travel advance and
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-September 1 through December 31, 2005). you did not spend all the money on business-re-
Under her employer’s accountable plan, she ac- lated expenses, or you do not have proof of all ployer.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You were not reimbursed by your em-Table 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
ployer for your expenses (amounts in-Reimbursements cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not
considered reimbursements).
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee • If you are claiming car expenses, you use
the standard mileage rate.other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on
arrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: *
Car expenses. If you used a car to performAn accountable plan with: your job as an employee, you may be able to
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount.
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and thenAdequate accounting made and excess claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.returned. Car expenses using the standard mileage rate
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount.
pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.Adequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1.
excess both required but excess not Transportation expenses.Show your trans-
returned. portation expenses that did not involve overnight
travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or onPer diem or mileage allowance up toNo amount. All expenses and Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on thisthe federal rate: reimbursements only line business expenses you have for parkingAdequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-
returned. are claimed. ating your car or expenses of commuting be-
Otherwise, form is nottween your home and work.
filed.
Employee business expenses other than
Per diem or mileage allowance up toThe excess amount No amount. meals and entertainment.Show your other
the federal rate: as wages in box 1. employee business expenses on Form 2106,
Adequate accounting and return of The amount up to lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, lines
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals andexcess both required but excess not the federal rate is
entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-returned. reported only in box
penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-12—it is not
tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,reported in box 1.
and trade and professional publications.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceedsThe excess amount All expenses (and If line 4 expenses are the only onesthe federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement you are claiming, you received no re-Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form imbursements (or the reimburse-
TIP
rate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only ifments were all included in box 1 of your Formreported only in box expenses in excess ofW-2), and the Special Rules discussed later do12—it is not the federal rate are not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise, 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on
form is not required.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. List the type
and amount of each expense on the dotted linesA nonaccountable plan with: and include the total on line 20.
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses.Meal and entertainment expenses. Showexcess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1. the full amount of your expenses for
business-related meals and entertainment onNo reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses.
Form 2106, line 5, Column B. Include mealsas wages in box 1.
while away from your tax home overnight and
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. other business meals and entertainment. Enter
50% of the line 8, column B, meal and entertain-
ment expenses on line 9, Column B.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac- Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full
countable plan. Her employer will include thecountable plan.Your employer will combine amount of your meals and entertainment on the
$6,000 on Kim’s Form W-2 as if it were wages. Ifthe amount of any reimbursement or other ex- line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,pense allowance paid to you under a nonac- 50%. Enter the result on line 5.
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ andcountable plan with your wages, salary, or other Hours of service limits.If you are subjectitemize her deductions.pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 to the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofof your Form W-2. service” limits, use 70% instead of 50% for You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ
Completing Forms meals while away from your tax home.and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-2106 and 2106-EZpenses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment 7, the amounts your employer (or third party)This section briefly describes how employees
expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- reimbursed you that were not included in box 1complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3
cussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses. of your Form W-2. (You cannot use Formexplains what the employer reports on Form
Also, your total expenses will be subject to theW-2 and what the employee reports on Form2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re-
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies2106. The instructions for the forms have moreported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2.
to most miscellaneous itemized deductions oninformation on completing them. Allocating your reimbursement. If youSchedule A (Form 1040). Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use thewere reimbursed under an accountable plan and
shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employeewant to deduct excess expenses that were notExample. Kim’s employer gives her $500 abusiness expenses. You can use this form if youreimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-month ($6,000 for the year) for her businessmeet all of the following conditions. bursement. This is necessary if your employerexpenses. Kim does not have to provide any
pays your reimbursement in the following man-proof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim• You are an employee deducting expenses
can keep any funds that she does not spend. attributable to your job. ner:
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 20 of Schedule A ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross• Pays you a single amount that covers (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedmeals and/or entertainment, as well asductions, including employee business ex-deduction.other business expenses, and penses, are subject to a If you are a fee-basis official, include your
• Does not clearly identify how much is for2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. This limit isemployee business expenses from Form 2106,
deductible meals and/or entertainment.figured on line 25 of Schedule A (Form 1040).line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040,
line 24.You must allocate that single payment so that3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If
you know how much to enter on Form 2106, lineyour adjusted gross income (line 38 of FormExpenses of certain performing artists.If7, Column A and Column B. 1040) is more than $145,950 ($72,975 if you areyou are a performing artist, you may qualify tomarried filing separately), the total of certaindeduct your employee business expenses as anExample. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-itemized deductions, including employee busi-adjustment to gross income rather than as apense allowance of $5,000 this year under anness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 29miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,accountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-for more information on this limit. you must meet all of the following requirements. sisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-
tainment and car expenses. Rob’s employer did 1. During the tax year, you perform servicesSpecial Rulesnot clearly show how much of the $3,000 was for in the performing arts as an employee forthe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-This section discusses special rules that applyat least two employers.ally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forto Armed Forces reservists, government offi-2. You receive at least $200 each from anyairfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 forcials who are paid on a fee basis, performingtwo of these employers.car expenses). artists, and disabled employees withSince the airfare allowance was clearly iden-impairment-related work expenses. 3. Your related performing-arts business ex-tified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the payment penses are more than 10% of your grossgoes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. ToArmed Forces reservists traveling more than income from the performance of thoseallocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses the100 miles from home.If you are a member of services.worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the4. Your adjusted gross income is not moreHis completed worksheet follows. United States and you travel more than 100 than $16,000 before deducting these busi-miles away from home in connection with yourness expenses.1. Enter the total amount of performance of services as a member of thereimbursements your employer gave reserves, you can deduct your travel expensesyou that were not reported to you in Special rules for married persons.If youas an adjustment to gross income rather than asbox 1 of Form W-2............ $3,000 are married, you must file a joint return unlessa miscellaneous itemized deduction. The2. Enter the total amount of your you lived apart from your spouse at all timesamount of expenses you can deduct as an ad-expenses for the periods covered by during the tax year.justment to gross income is limited to the regularthis reimbursement............ 4,500 If you file a joint return, you must figure re-federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, and3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your quirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for bothincidental expenses) and the standard mileagetotal expense for meals and you and your spouse. However, requirement (4)rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees,entertainment............... 2,000 applies to your and your spouse’s combinedferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explained4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the adjusted gross income.earlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances.result as a decimal (rounded to at
least three places)............ .444 Where to report.  If you meet all of theMember of a reserve component.You are
above requirements, you should first complete5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the a member of a reserve component of the Armed
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include yourresult here and in Column B, line 7 1,332Forces of the United States if you are in the
performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter theArmy, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast
Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the totalresult here and in Column A, line 7 $1,668Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the
on line 24 of Form 1040.United States, the Air National Guard of theOn line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668 If you do not meet all of the above require-United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-lic Health Service.Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Column penses as an adjustment to gross income.B. How to report.If you have reserve-relatedInstead, you must complete Form 2106 or
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from2106-EZ and deduct your employee businessAfter you complete the form.After you have home, you should first complete Form 2106 orexpenses as an itemized deduction on Schedulecompleted your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses forA (Form 1040), line 20.the directions on that form to deduct your ex-reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up topenses on the appropriate line of your tax return.the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, orImpairment-related work expenses of dis-For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule AForm 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,abled employees. If you are an employee(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentline 24. Subtract this amount from the total onwith a physical or mental disability, yourofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andimpairment-related work expenses are not sub-an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limitployee with impairment-related work expenses,Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. that applies to most other employee businesssee Special Rules, later. You cannot deduct expenses of travel thatexpenses. After you complete Form 2106 or
does not take you more than 100 miles from2106-EZ, enter your impairment-related workLimits on employee business expenses.
home as an adjustment to gross income. In-expenses from Form 2106, line 10, or FormYour employee business expenses may be sub-
stead, you must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),ject to any of the three limits described next.
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an line 27, and identify the type and amount of thisThese limits are figured in the following order on
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),expense on the dotted line next to line 27. Enterthe specified form.
line 20. your employee business expenses that are un-1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer- related to your disability from Form 2106, linetain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-Officials paid on a fee basis.Certain fee-ba-10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, lineject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, yousis officials can claim their employee business20.figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofexpenses whether or not they itemize their otherImpairment-related work expenses are yourForm 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain- deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). allowable expenses for attendant care at yourment Expenses, earlier. workplace and other expenses you have in con-Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-
nection with your workplace that are necessary2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-ployed by a state or local government and who
for you to be able to work. For more information,tions. If you are an employee, deduct em- are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They
see chapter 21.ployee business expenses (as figured on Form can deduct their business expenses in perform-
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car expenses.......... 8,580nent information in a travel expense log (notIllustrated Example Meals ............... 2,632shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses for
Lodging, laundry, drylodging and for any other expenses of $75 orBill Wilson is an employee of Fashion Clothing cleaning............. 8,975more.Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical week, Bill Entertainment......... 1,870leaves his home on Long Island on Monday Gifts, education, etc...... 4 3 0During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000morning and drives to Albany to exhibit the Total ............... $22,812miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-Bill drove 14,000 business miles from January 1ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion’s Bill received an allowance of $6,000 ($500to August 31, 2005, and 6,000 miles from Sep-new line of merchandise to Town Department per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didtember 1 through the end of the year. He an-Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talks not have to account to his employer for theswers all the questions in Part II of Formwith Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Town reimbursement, and the $6,000 was included as2106-EZ and figures his car expense to beDepartment Store, to discuss the new line. He
income in box 1 of his Form W-2.later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinner $8,580 (14,000 × 401/2 cents per mile ($5,670) +
to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s new line6,000 × 481/2 cents per mile ($2,910)). Because Bill’s reimbursement was included
of clothing. in his income and he is using the standard mile-His total employee business expenses areBill purchased his car on January 3, 2002. age rate for his car expenses, he files Formshown in the following table.He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form ispense purposes. He records his total mileage, shown on the next page. Type of Expense Amountbusiness mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
Parking fees and tolls.... $ 3 2 5year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
5,670
2,910
8,580
325
8,975
20,561
13 02
20,000 2,600 2,400
2,251
430
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and then go to line 1a below.1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1c through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 70% (.70) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1c through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
20. (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing
artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter
this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2005)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2005.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year)
/H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2005, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2005 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2005
Mulitply business miles driven before September 1, 2005, by 40.5¢ (.405)
Add lines 1a and 1b
a
b
c
Mulitply business miles driven after August 31, 2005, by 48.5¢ (.485)
1c
1a
1b
4,502
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tuition and fees deduction (see chapter 19)Education Required byand the Hope and lifetime learning credits (see
Employer or by Lawchapter 35). You may qualify for these other
27. benefits even if you do not meet the require-
Once you have met the minimum educationalments listed earlier.
requirements for your job, your employer or theAlso, keep in mind that your work-relatedlaw may require you to get more education. Thiseducation expenses may qualify you to claimTax Benefits for additional education is qualifying work-relatedmore than one tax benefit. Generally, you mayeducation if all three of the following require-claim any number of benefits as long as you usements are met.Work-Related different expenses to figure each one.
1. It is required for you to keep your presentWhen you figure your taxes, you may
salary, status, or job,Education want to compare these tax benefits so
you can choose the method(s) that
TIP
2. The requirement serves a business pur-
give you the lowest tax liability. First, figure yourpose of your employer, and
taxes using the expenses as business deduc-What’s New 3. The education is not part of a program thattions. Then, figure your taxes again using any of
will qualify you for a new trade or business.the other deductions and credits for which you
Standard mileage rate. Generally, if you qualify. You may find that a combination ofWhen you get more education than your em-claim a business deduction for work-related ed-credit(s) and deduction(s) gives you the lowestployer or the law requires, the additional educa-ucation and you drive your car to and fromtax. tion can be qualifying work-related educationschool, the amount you can deduct for miles only if it maintains or improves skills required indriven from January 1, 2005, through August 31, your present work. See Education To MaintainUseful Items2005, is 401/2 cents a mile. You can deduct 481/2 or Improve Skills.You may want to see:cents a mile for miles driven from September 1,
2005, through December 31, 2005. This is up Example. You are a teacher who has satis-Publicationfrom 371/2 cents a mile in 2004. See Transporta- fied the minimum requirements for teaching.tion Expenses under What Expenses Can Be ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarYour employer requires you to take an additionalDeducted, for more information. Expenses college course each year to keep your teaching
job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education trade or business, they are qualifying work-re-
lated education even if you eventually receive aForm (and Instructions) master’s degree and an increase in salary be-Reminder
❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses cause of this extra education.
Limit on itemized deductions.If your ad- ❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
justed gross income for 2005 is more than Business Expenses Education To Maintain
$145,950 ($72,975 if you are married filing sep-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized or Improve Skillsarately), your itemized deductions may be lim- Deductionsited. See chapter 29 for more information about If your education is not required by your em-this limit. ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-
related education only if it maintains or improves
skills needed in your present work. This could
include refresher courses, courses on currentQualifying Work-Introduction developments, and academic or vocational
courses.Related EducationThis chapter discusses work-related education
expenses that you may be able to deduct as Example. You repair televisions, radios,You can deduct the costs of qualifying work-business expenses. and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep uprelated education as business expenses. This isTo claim such a deduction, you must: with the latest changes, you take specialeducation that meets at least one of the follow-
courses in radio and stereo service. Theseing two tests.1. Be working,
courses maintain and improve skills required in
2. Itemize your deductions on Schedule A your work.1. The education is required by your em-(Form 1040) if you are an employee, ployer or the law to keep your present sal-
Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.ary, status, or job. The required education3. File Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule Education to maintain or improve skills neededmust serve a bona fide business purposeF (Form 1040) if you are self-employed, in your present work is not qualifying education ifof your employer.and it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-
2. The education maintains or improves skills4. Have expenses for education that meet the ness.
needed in your present work.requirements discussed under Qualifying Temporary absence. If you stop workingWork-Related Education. However, even if the education meets one orfor a year or less in order to get education to
both of the above tests, it is not qualifyingIf you are an employee and able to itemize maintain or improve skills needed in your pres-
work-related education if it:your deductions, you may be able to claim a ent work and then return to the same general
deduction for the expenses you pay for your type of work, your absence is considered tempo-
1. Is needed to meet the minimum educa-work-related education. Your deduction will be rary. Education that you get during a temporary
tional requirements of your present tradethe amount by which your qualifying work-re- absence is qualifying work-related education if it
or business, orlated education expenses plus other job and maintains or improves skills needed in your
certain miscellaneous expenses is greater than present work.2. Is part of a program of study that will qual-2% of your adjusted gross income. See chapterify you for a new trade or business.28. Example. You quit your biology research
You can deduct the costs of qualifyingIf you are self-employed, you deduct your job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-
work-related education as a business expenseexpenses for qualifying work-related education dent for one year. If you return to work in biology
even if the education could lead to a degree.directly from your self-employment income. research after completing the courses, the edu-
Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check toYour work-related education expenses may cation is related to your present work even if you
see if your education qualifies.also qualify you for other tax benefits, such as do not go back to work with the same employer.
Page 184 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 187 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Indefinite absence.If you stop work for 2. Your years of service count toward ob- Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
taining tenure.more than a year, your absence from your job is Example 1 except that you have a bachelor’s
considered indefinite. Education during an in- degree and only six professional education3. You have a vote in faculty decisions.definite absence, even if it maintains or im- courses. The additional four education courses
4. Your school makes contributions for you toproves skills needed in the work from which you can be qualifying work-related education. Al-a retirement plan other than social securityare absent, is considered to qualify you for a though you do not have all the required courses,or a similar program.new trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali- you have already met the minimum educational
fying work-related education. requirements.
Example 1. The law in your state requires
beginning secondary school teachers to have aExample 3. Assume the same facts as inEducation To Meet
bachelor’s degree, including 10 professional ed-Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3Minimum Requirements ucation courses. In addition, to keep the job, ayears of college. The courses you take that lead
teacher must complete a fifth year of trainingto a bachelor’s degree (including those in edu-Education you need to meet the minimum edu-within 10 years from the date of hire. If thecation) are not qualifying work-related educa-cational requirements for your present trade oremploying school certifies to the state Depart-tion. They are needed to meet the minimumbusiness is not qualifying work-related educa-ment of Education that qualified teachers cannoteducational requirements for employment as ation. The minimum educational requirementsbe found, the school can hire persons with only 3
teacher.are determined by: years of college. However, to keep their jobs,
these teachers must get a bachelor’s degree1. Laws and regulations, Example 4. You have a bachelor’s degreeand the required professional education courses
and you work as a temporary instructor at awithin 3 years.2. Standards of your profession, trade, or
university. At the same time, you take graduatebusiness, and Under these facts, the bachelor’s degree,courses toward an advanced degree. The ruleswhether or not it includes the 10 professional3. Your employer. of the university state that you can become aeducation courses, is considered the minimum
faculty member only if you get a graduate de-Once you have met the minimum educa- educational requirement for qualification as a
gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-tional requirements that were in effect when youteacher in your state.
tor only as long as you show satisfactorywere hired, you do not have to meet any newIf you have all the required education exceptminimum educational requirements. This means progress toward getting this degree. You havethe fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-
that if the minimum requirements change after not met the minimum educational requirementstional requirements. The fifth year of training is
you were hired, any education you need to meet to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-qualifying work-related education unless it is
the new requirements can be qualifying educa- ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu-part of a program of study that will qualify you for
tion. a new trade or business. cation.
You have not necessarily met the
minimum educational requirements of
your trade or business simply be-
CAUTION
!
cause you are already doing the work.
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering
student. Although you have not received your
degree or certification, you work part time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
when you become a faculty member. You gen-
erally will be considered a faculty member when
one or more of the following occurs. 
1. You have tenure.
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 185

Page 188 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Certification in a new state.Once you have 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-Teaching and Related Duties
tically expected to last 1 year or less, butmet the minimum educational requirements for
All teaching and related duties are consideredat a later date your attendance is reasona-teachers for your state, you are considered to
the same general kind of work. A change in bly expected to last more than 1 year. Yourhave met the minimum educational require-
duties in any of the following ways is not consid-attendance will be considered temporaryments in all states. This is true even if you must
ered a change to a new business. up to the date you determine it will lastget additional education to be certified in an-
more than 1 year.other state. Any additional education you need1. Elementary school teacher to secondaryis qualifying work-related education. You haveschool teacher.already met the minimum requirements for Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)
2. Teacher of one subject, such as biology, toteaching. Teaching in another state is not a new above, your attendance is not temporary if facts
teacher of another subject, such as art.trade or business. and circumstances indicate otherwise.
3. Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.
Attendance not on a temporary basis.YouExample. You hold a permanent teaching
4. Classroom teacher to school administrator.do not go to school on a temporary basis if any ofcertificate in State A and are employed as a
the following situations apply to you.teacher in that state for several years. You move
to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher. 1. Your attendance at school is realisticallyYou are required, however, to complete certain expected to last more than 1 year. It doesprescribed courses to get a permanent teachingWhat Expenses Can Be not matter how long you actually attend.certificate in State B. These additional courses
2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-are qualifying work-related education becauseDeducted tically expected to last 1 year or less, butthe teaching position in State B involves the
at a later date your attendance is reasona-same general kind of work for which you wereIf your education meets the requirements de-bly expected to last more than 1 year. Yourqualified in State A. scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related attendance is not temporary after the dateEducation, you can generally deduct your edu- you determine it will last more than 1 year.cation expenses as business expenses. If youEducation That
are not self-employed, you can deduct business
Qualifies You for a expenses only if you itemize your deductions.
You cannot deduct expenses related to Deductible TransportationNew Trade or Business
tax-exempt and excluded income. Expenses
Education that is part of a program of study thatDeductible expenses. The following educa-If you are regularly employed and go directlywill qualify you for a new trade or business is nottion expenses can be deducted. from home to school on a temporary basis, youqualifying work-related education. This is true
can deduct the round-trip costs of transportationeven if you do not plan to enter that trade or1. Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-between your home and school. This is truebusiness. ilar items. regardless of the location of the school, theIf you are an employee, a change of duties2. Certain transportation and travel costs.distance traveled, or whether you attend schoolthat involves the same general kind of work is on nonwork days.not a new trade or business. 3. Other education expenses, such as costsTransportation expenses include the actualof research and typing when writing a pa-costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellExample 1. You are an accountant. Your per as part of an educational program.as the costs of using your car. Transportationemployer requires you to get a law degree at expenses do not include amounts spent foryour own expense. You register at a law schoolNondeductible expenses. You cannot de- travel, meals, or lodging while you are awayfor the regular curriculum that leads to a lawduct personal or capital expenses. For example,from home overnight.degree. Even if you do not intend to become ayou cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation
lawyer, the education is not qualifying becausetime or annual leave you take to attend classes.Example 1. You regularly work in a nearbythe law degree will qualify you for a new trade orThis amount is a personal expense. town, and go directly from work to home. Youbusiness. also attend school every work night for 3 monthsUnclaimed reimbursement. If you do not
to take a course that improves your job skills.claim reimbursement that you are entitled toExample 2. You are a general practitioner Since you are attending school on a temporaryreceive from your employer, you cannot deductof medicine. You take a 2-week course to review basis, you can deduct your daily round-tripthe expenses that apply to the reimbursement.developments in several specialized fields of transportation expenses in going between homemedicine. The course does not qualify you for a and school. This is true regardless of the dis-Example. Your employer agrees to paynew profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- tance traveled.your education expenses if you file a vouchercation because it maintains or improves skillsshowing your expenses. You do not file arequired in your present profession. Example 2. Assume the same facts as invoucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be-
Example 1 except that on certain nights you gocause you did not file a voucher, you cannotExample 3. While working in the private directly from work to school and then home. Youdeduct the expenses on your tax return.practice of psychiatry, you enter a program to can deduct your transportation expenses from
study and train at an accredited psychoanalytic your regular work site to school and then home.Transportation Expensesinstitute. The program will lead to qualifying you
to practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic Example 3. Assume the same facts as inIf your education qualifies, you can deduct localtraining does not qualify you for a new profes- Example 1 except that you attend the school fortransportation costs of going directly from worksion. It is qualifying work-related education be- 9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Sinceto school. If you are regularly employed and gocause it maintains or improves skills required in you are attending school on a temporary basis,to school on a temporary basis, you can alsoyou can deduct your round-trip transportationyour present profession. deduct the costs of returning from school toexpenses in going between home and school.home.
Example 4. Assume the same facts as inBar or CPA Review Course Attendance on a temporary basis.You go to
Example 1 except that you attend classes twiceschool on a temporary basis if either of theReview courses to prepare for the bar examina- a week for 15 months. Since your attendance infollowing situations applies to you.tion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex- school is not considered temporary, you cannot
amination are not qualifying work-related 1. Your attendance at school is realistically deduct your transportation expenses in going
education. They are part of a program of studyexpected to last 1 year or less and does between home and school. If you go directly
that can qualify you for a new profession. indeed last for 1 year or less. from work to school, you can deduct the
Page 186 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 189 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
one-way transportation expenses of going from She took one course, which is one-fourth of a expenses under any other provision of the
work to school. If you go from work to home to full course load of study. She spent the rest oflaw, for example, as a tuition and fees de-
school and return home, your transportation ex- the time on personal activities. Her reasons forduction. See chapter 19.
penses cannot be more than if you had gone taking the course in Michigan were all personal.• Deduct work-related education expensesdirectly from work to school. Sue’s trip is mainly personal because paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, orthree-fourths of her time is considered personal
employer-provided educational assis-Using your car.If you use your car (whethertime. She cannot deduct the cost of her
you own or lease it) for transportation to school, tance. See Adjustments to Qualifyinground-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de-
you can deduct your actual expenses or use the Work-Related Education Expenses, next.duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50%
standard mileage rate to figure the amount youlimit) and lodging costs for the time she attended
can deduct. The standard mileage rate for milesthe university. Adjustments to Qualifyingdriven from January 1, 2005, through August 31,
Work-Related Education Expenses2005, is 401/2 cents a mile. The rate for milesExample 3. Dave works in Nashville and
driven from September 1, 2005, through De-recently traveled to California to take a 2-weekIf you pay qualifying work-related education ex-cember 31, 2005, is 481/2 cents a mile. Which-seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-relatedpenses with certain tax-free funds, you cannotever method you use, you can also deduct education.
claim a deduction for those amounts. You mustparking fees and tolls. See chapter 26 for infor-While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks onmation on deducting your actual expenses of reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount ofpersonal activities. The facts, including the extrausing a car. any tax-free educational assistance you re-8-week stay, show that his main purpose was to
ceived.take a vacation.
Travel Expenses Dave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or Tax-free educational assistance includes:
his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can
• The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (seededuct only his expenses for meals (subject to
50% Limit on Meals, later), and lodging if: lowships (see chapter 1 of Publicationthe 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he
970),attended the seminar.
1. You travel overnight to obtain qualifying
• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationwork-related education, and Cruises and conventions. Certain cruises 970),and conventions offer seminars or courses as2. The main purpose of the trip is to attend a
part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars or• Employer-provided educational assistancework-related course or seminar.
courses are work related, your deduction for(see chapter 11 of Publication 970),Travel expenses for qualifying work-related edu-travel may be limited. This applies to:
• Veterans’ educational assistance (seecation are treated the same as travel expenses
chapter 1 of Publication 970), andfor other employee business purposes. For 1. Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other
more information, see chapter 26. form of luxury water transportation, and• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments
You cannot deduct expenses for per- (other than gifts or inheritances) received2. Conventions outside the North American
sonal activities, such as sightseeing,area. for education assistance.
visiting, or entertaining.CAUTION
!
For a discussion of the limits on travel ex-Do not reduce the qualifying work-related ed-pense deductions that apply to cruises and con-Mainly personal travel.If your travel away ucation expenses by amounts paid with fundsventions, see Luxury Water Travel andfrom home is mainly personal, you cannot de- the student receives as:Conventions in Publication 463.duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and
• Payment for services, such as wages,lodging. You can deduct only your expenses for50% limit on meals. You can deduct onlylodging and 50% of your expenses for meals50% of the cost of your meals while traveling• A loan,during the time you attend the qualified educa-away from home to obtain qualifying work-re-• A gift,tional activities. lated education. You cannot have been reim-
Whether a trip’s purpose is mainly personalbursed for the meals. • An inheritance, oror educational depends upon the facts and cir-Employees must use Form 2106 or Form • A withdrawal from the student’s personalcumstances. An important factor is the compari-2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit. savings.son of time spent on personal activities with time
spent on educational activities. If you spend
Also, do not reduce the qualifying work-re-more time on personal activities, the trip is con-Travel as Education lated education expenses by any scholarship orsidered mainly educational only if you can show
a substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to fellowship reported as income on the student’sYou cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of
a particular location. return or any scholarship which, by its terms,education even if it is directly related to your
cannot be applied to qualifying work-related ed-duties in your work or business.
Example 1. John works in Newark, New ucation expenses.
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti-Example. You are a French language
ble 1-week course at the request of his em-teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicagotravel, you traveled through France to improve
was to take the course. your knowledge of the French language. You
ReimbursementsWhile there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter-chose your itinerary and most of your activities
tained some friends, and took a side trip toto improve your French language skills. You
How you treat reimbursements depends on thePleasantville for a day. cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-
arrangement you have with your employer.Since the trip was mainly for business, Johntion expenses. This is true even if you spent
can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. Hemost of your time learning French by visitingThere are two basic types of reimbursement
cannot deduct his transportation expenses ofFrench schools and families, attending moviesarrangements—accountable plans and nonac-
going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only theor plays, and engaging in similar activities.countable plans. You can tell the type of plan
meals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging you are reimbursed under by the way the reim-connected with his educational activities. bursement is reported on your Form W-2.No Double Benefit Allowed
For information about how to treat reim-Example 2. Sue works in Boston. She wentYou cannot do any of the following. bursements under both accountable and nonac-to a university in Michigan to take a course for
countable plans, see Reimbursements  inwork. The course is qualifying work-related edu-• Deduct work-related education expenses
chapter 26.cation. as business expenses if you deduct these
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 187

Page 190 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other employee business expenses on Sched- the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
ule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Special rules fortion as an adjustment to gross income ratherDeducting Business expenses of certain performing artists andthan as an itemized deduction.
fee-basis officials and for impairment-relatedInclude the cost of your qualifying work-re-Expenses work expenses are explained later.) This deduc-lated education with any other employee busi-
tion is subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-ness expenses on Form 1040, line 24. You doSelf-employed persons and employees reportcome limit that applies to most miscellaneousnot have to itemize your deductions on Sched-business expenses differently. itemized deductions. See chapter 28. ule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the deductionThe following information explains what
forms you must use to deduct the cost of your is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.To figure your deduc-
qualifying education as a business expense. come limit. You must complete Form 2106 ortion for employee business expenses, including
2106-EZ to figure your deduction, even if youqualifying work-related education, you generally
meet the requirements described earlier undermust complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ.Self-Employed Persons
Form not required.Form not required.Do not complete either For more information on qualified performingIf you are self-employed, you must report theForm 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if:
cost of your qualifying work-related education on artists, see Publication 463.
• All reimbursements, if any, were includedthe appropriate form used to report your busi-
in box 1 of your Form W-2, andness income and expenses (generally Schedule Impairment-Related WorkC, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses• You are not claiming travel, transportation,
Expensesinclude expenses for a car or truck, travel, ormeal, or entertainment expenses.
meals, report those expenses the same way you
If you are disabled and have impairment-relatedreport other business expenses for those items.If you meet both of these requirements, enterwork expenses that are necessary for you to beSee the instructions for the form you file forthe expenses directly on Schedule A (Formable to get qualifying work-related education,information on how to complete it. 1040), line 20. (Special rules for expenses ofyou can deduct these expenses on Schedule Acertain performing artists and fee-basis officials
(Form 1040), line 27. They are not subject to theand for impairment-related work expenses areEmployees 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deductexplained later.)
these expenses, you must complete Form 2106If you are an employee, you can deduct the costUsing Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorteror 2106-EZ, even if you meet the requirements,of qualifying work-related education only if you:and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,described earlier, under Form not required.you can use this form if:1. Did not receive any reimbursement from For more information on impairment-related
your employer, • All reimbursements, if any, were includedwork expenses, see Publication 463.
in box 1 of your Form W-2, and2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable
plan (amount is included in box 1 of Form• You are using the standard mileage rate if
W-2), or you are claiming vehicle expenses.
Recordkeeping3. Received reimbursement under an ac-
If you do not meet both of these requirements,countable plan, but the amount received
use Form 2106.was less than your expenses. You must keep records as proof of
any deduction claimed on your taxIf either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct thePerforming Artists and return. Generally, you should keepRECORDS
total qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de-
your records for 3 years from the date of filingduct only the qualifying costs that were moreFee-Basis Officials the tax return and claiming the deduction.than your reimbursement.
For specific information about keeping rec-In order to deduct the cost of your qualifying If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state
ords of business expenses, see Recordkeepingwork-related education as a business expense, (or local) government official who is paid in
include the amount with your deduction for any whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct in chapter 26.
Page 188 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 191 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex- 2. For carrying on your trade or business of
penses that is more than 2% of your adjustedbeing an employee, and
gross income. You figure your deduction on3. Ordinary and necessary.28. Schedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted
gross income from the total amount of theseAn expense is ordinary if it is common and
expenses. Your adjusted gross income is theaccepted in your trade, business, or profession.
amount on Form 1040, line 38. An expense is necessary if it is appropriate andMiscellaneous Generally, you apply the 2% limit after youhelpful to your business. An expense does not
apply any other deduction limit. For example,have to be required to be considered necessary.
you apply the 50% (or 70%) limit on business-re-Deductions Examples of unreimbursed employee ex-
lated meals and entertainment (discussed inpenses are listed next. The list is followed by
chapter 26) before you apply the 2% limit.discussions of additional unreimbursed em-
Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-ployee expenses.Reminder cussed in the three categories in which you
• Business bad debt of an employee.report them on Schedule A.
Limit on itemized deductions.For 2005, if • Education that is work related. (See chap-1. Unreimbursed employee expenses (lineyour adjusted gross income is more than ter 27.)20).$145,950 ($72,975 if you are married filing sep-
• Legal fees related to your job.arately), you may have to reduce the amount of2. Tax preparation fees (line 21).
certain itemized deductions, including most mis- • Licenses and regulatory fees.3. Other expenses (line 22).cellaneous deductions. See chapter 29 for more
• Malpractice insurance premiums.information.
Exceptions to 2% limit. The following • Medical examinations required by an em-paragraphs describe certain employee businessployer.expenses that are not subject to the 2% limit.
• Occupational taxes.Introduction Armed Forces reservists. If you are a
• Passport for a business trip.member of a reserve component of the ArmedThis chapter explains which expenses you canForces of the United States, and you travel moreclaim as miscellaneous itemized deductions on • Subscriptions to professional journals andthan 100 miles away from home in connectionSchedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce the trade magazines related to your work.with your performance of services as a membertotal of most miscellaneous itemized deductions • Travel, transportation, entertainment, andof the reserves, you may be able to deduct someby 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap- gifts related to your work. (See chapterof your reserve-related travel costs as an adjust-ter covers the following topics. ment to gross income rather than as an itemized 26.)
• Deductions subject to the 2% limit. deduction. For more information, see Armed
Forces Reservists Traveling More Than 100• Deductions not subject to the 2% limit. Business Liability InsuranceMiles From Home, under Deductions Not Sub-
• Expenses you cannot deduct. ject to the 2% Limit, later. You can deduct insurance premiums you paid
for protection against personal liability forEducators. If you were an eligible educator
You must keep records to verify your wrongful acts on the job.in 2005, you can deduct up to $250 of qualified
deductions. You should keep re- expenses you paid in 2005 as an adjustment to
ceipts, canceled checks, financial ac-income rather than as an itemized deduction.RECORDS
count statements, and other documentary See Educator Expenses in chapter 19. Damages for Breach of
evidence. For more information on recordkeep- Employment ContractImpairment-related work expenses.If youing, get Publication 552, Recordkeeping for Indi-have a physical or mental disability, certain ex-viduals. If you break an employment contract, you canpenses you incur that allow you to work may notdeduct damages you pay your former employerbe subject to the 2% limit. See Impairment-Re- that are attributable to the pay you received fromUseful Items lated Work Expenses under Deductions Not that employer.You may want to see: Subject to the 2% Limit, later.
Performing artists.If you are a qualifiedPublication
performing artist, you may be able to deductDepreciation on Computers or❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions your employee business expenses as an adjust-Cellular Telephones
ment to income rather than as a miscellaneous❏ 535 Business Expenses
itemized deduction. See Special Rules in chap- You can claim a depreciation deduction for a❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home ter 26 if you need more information about thiscomputer or cellular telephone that you use in(Including Use by Daycare exception. your work as an employee if its use is:Providers)
State and local government officials paid1. For the convenience of your employer, and❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property on a fee basis.If you performed services as
2. Required as a condition of your employ-an employee of a state or local government and
Form (and Instructions) ment.you were paid in whole or in part on a fee basis,
you can claim your trade or business expenses❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses For more information about the rules andin performing those services as an adjustment toexceptions to the rules affecting the allowable❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee income, rather than as a miscellaneous deduc-deductions for a home computer or cellular tele-Business Expenses tion. See Officials Paid on a Fee Basis under phone, see Publication 529.Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit, later.
Unreimbursed Employee Dues to Chambers of Commerce
Deductions Subject and Professional SocietiesExpenses (Line 20)
You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-to the 2% Limit You can deduct only unreimbursed employee
sional organizations (such as bar associationsexpenses that are:
and medical associations) and to chambers ofYou can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-
commerce and similar organizations, if member-ous itemized deductions on Schedule A 1. Paid or incurred during your tax year,
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 189

Page 192 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ship helps you carry out the duties of your job. 2. There was a substantial break between the received and included in income in an earlier
ending of your last job and your looking foryear, you can deduct the repayment.Similar organizations include:
a new one, or
• Boards of trade,
3. You are looking for a job for the first time.Research Expenses of a College• Business leagues,
ProfessorEmployment and outplacement agency fees.• Civic or public service organizations,
You can deduct employment and outplacementIf you are a college professor, you can deduct• Real estate boards, and agency fees you pay in looking for a new job inresearch expenses, including travel expenses,your present occupation.• Trade associations. for teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing
Employer pays you back.If, in a later year,on subjects that relate directly to the field of yourYou cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-your employer pays you back for employmentteaching duties. You must have undertaken thetion if one of its main purposes is to: agency fees, you must include the amount youresearch as a means of carrying out the duties
receive in your gross income up to the amount ofexpected of a professor and without expectation1. Conduct entertainment activities for mem-your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov- of profit apart from salary. However, you cannotbers or their guests, or eries in chapter 12.) deduct the cost of travel as a form of education.
2. Provide members or their guests with ac-Employer pays the employment agency.
cess to entertainment facilities. If your employer pays the fees directly to the
Tools Used in Your Workemployment agency and you are not responsi-Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon clubs
ble for them, you do not include them in yourare not deductible. See Club Dues under Non- Generally, you can deduct amounts you spendgross income.deductible Expenses, later. for tools used in your work if the tools wear out
and are thrown away within 1 year from the dateR´esum´e. You can deduct amounts you spend
Lobbying and political activities.You may for preparing and mailing copies of a r´esum´e to of purchase. You can depreciate the cost of
not be able to deduct that part of your dues thatprospective employers if you are looking for atools that have a useful life substantially beyond
is for certain lobbying and political activities. Seenew job in your present occupation. the tax year. For more information about depre-
Dues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex- ciation, see Publication 946.Travel and transportation expenses.If youpenses, later. travel to an area and, while there, you look for a
new job in your present occupation, you may beUnion Dues and Expensesable to deduct travel expenses to and from theEducator Expenses Over Limit area. You can deduct the travel expenses if theYou can deduct dues and initiation fees you paytrip is primarily to look for a new job. The amountfor union membership.If you were an educator in 2005 and you hadof time you spend on personal activity comparedqualified expenses that were more than you can You can also deduct assessments for benefitto the amount of time you spend in looking fordeduct on Form 1040, line 23, you can deduct payments to unemployed union members. How-work is important in determining whether the tripthe rest as an itemized deduction subject to the ever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a2% limit. See Educator Expenses in chapter 19. ments or contributions that provides funds fornew job. the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex-Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-penses to and from an area, you can deduct theHome Office sion fund, even if the union requires you to makeexpenses of looking for a new job in your pres-the contributions.ent occupation while in the area.If you use a part of your home regularly and You may not be able to deduct amounts youYou can choose to use the standard mileageexclusively for business purposes, you may be pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-rate to figure your car expenses. The rate forable to deduct a part of the operating expenses ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-business use of a vehicle before September 1,and depreciation of your home. penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.2005, is 401/2 cents per mile. The rate for busi-You can claim this deduction for the busi-ness use of a vehicle after August 31, 2005, is
ness use of a part of your home only if you use481/2 cents per mile. See chapter 26 for more
that part of your home regularly and exclusively: Work Clothes and Uniformsinformation.
1. As your principal place of business for any You can deduct the cost and upkeep of work
clothes if the following two requirements aretrade or business, Licenses and Regulatory Fees met.2. As a place to meet or deal with your pa-
You can deduct the amount you pay each yeartients, clients, or customers in the normal 1. You must wear them as a condition of yourto state or local governments for licenses andcourse of your trade or business, or employment.regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-
3. In the case of a separate structure not at-fession. 2. The clothes are not suitable for everyday
tached to your home, in connection with wear.
your trade or business.
Occupational Taxes It is not enough that you wear distinc-The regular and exclusive business use
tive clothing. The clothing must bemust be for the convenience of your employerYou can deduct an occupational tax charged at specifically required by your em-CAUTION
!
and not just appropriate and helpful in your job.a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of workingployer. Nor is it enough that you do not, in fact,Get Publication 587 for more detailed informa-or conducting a business in the locality. If youwear your work clothes away from work. Thetion and a worksheet. are an employee, you can claim occupationalclothing must not be suitable for taking the placetaxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subjectof your regular clothing.to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as aExamples of workers who may be able toJob Search Expenses deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return.deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are:
delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-You can deduct certain expenses you have in
ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers,looking for a new job in your present occupation,Repayment of Income Aid Payment professional athletes, and transportation work-even if you do not get a new job.
ers (air, rail, bus, etc.).An “income aid payment” is one that is receivedYou cannot deduct these expenses if:
Musicians and entertainers can deduct theunder an employer’s plan to aid employees who
1. You are looking for a job in a new occupa- cost of theatrical clothing and accessories if theylose their jobs because of lack of work. If you
tion, repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you are not suitable for everyday wear.
Page 190 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 193 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, work clothing consisting of white You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-Fees to Collect Interest and
cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-Dividends
alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter issonably and closely related to these purposes.
required by his union to wear on the job, is not You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank,Some of these other expenses are explained in
distinctive in character or in the nature of a trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxablethe following discussions.uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main- bond interest or dividends on shares of stock.If the expenses you pay produce income thattaining blue work clothes worn by a welder at the But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker
is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Incomerequest of a foreman are not deductible. to buy investment property, such as stocks or
Expenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex- bonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the
penses. property.Protective clothing.You can deduct the cost
You cannot deduct the fee you pay to aof protective clothing required in your work, such
broker to sell securities. You can use the feeas safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hard
Appraisal Fees only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See thehats, and work gloves.
instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col-Examples of workers who may be required toYou can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them toumns (d) and (e), for information on how towear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-figure a casualty loss or the fair market value ofreport the fee.ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat
donated property.crew members, machinists, oil field workers,
pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Hobby Expenses
Certain Casualty and Theft LossesMilitary uniforms.You generally cannot de- You can generally deduct hobby expenses, butduct the cost of your uniforms if you are onYou can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aonly up to the amount of hobby income. A hobbyfull-time active duty in the armed forces. How- is not a business because it is not carried on tomiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to theever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-2% limit if you used the damaged or stolencan deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni- ter 12 under Other Income.property in performing services as an employee.form if military regulations restrict you from
First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In
Casualties and Thefts. You may also have tofiguring the deduction, you must reduce the cost Indirect Deductions ofby any nontaxable allowance you receive forinclude the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-Pass-Through Entitiesthese expenses. ness Property, if you are otherwise required to
If local military rules do not allow you to wearfile that form. To figure your deduction, add allPass-through entities include partnerships, S
fatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you cancasualty or theft losses from this type of propertycorporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-
deduct the amount by which the cost of buying licly offered. Deductions of pass-through entitiesincluded on Form 4684, lines 35 and 41b, orand keeping up these uniforms is more than the are passed through to the partners or sharehold-Form 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftuniform allowance you receive. ers. The partners or shareholders can deductlosses, see chapter 25.You can deduct the cost of your uniforms if their share of passed-through deductions for
you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a investment expenses as miscellaneous item-
military school. ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.Clerical Help and Office Rent
Example. You are a member of an invest-You can deduct office expenses, such as rentTax Preparation Fees ment club that is formed solely to invest in secur-and clerical help, that you have in connection(Line 21) ities. The club is treated as a partnership. Thewith your investments and collecting the taxable
partnership’s income is solely from taxable divi-income on them.You can usually deduct tax preparation fees in dends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2005 ties. In this case, you can deduct your share of
return, you can deduct fees paid in 2005 for the partnership’s operating expenses as miscel-Depreciation on Home Computerpreparing your 2004 return. These fees include laneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%
the cost of tax preparation software programs limit. However, if the investment club partner-You can deduct depreciation on your homeand tax publications. They also include any fee ship has investments that also produce nontax-computer if you use it to produce income (foryou paid for electronic filing of your return. How- able income, you cannot deduct your share ofexample, to manage your investments that pro-ever, if you paid your tax by credit card, you the partnership’s expenses that produce theduce taxable income). You generally must de-cannot deduct the convenience fee you were nontaxable income.preciate the computer using the straight linecharged.
method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-Deduct expenses of preparing tax schedules Publicly offered mutual funds.Publicly of-
relating to profit or loss from business (Schedule tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as anfered mutual funds do not pass deductions for
C or C-EZ), rentals or royalties (Schedule E), or investment expenses through to shareholders.employee and also use the computer in that
farm income and expenses (Schedule F) on the A mutual fund is “publicly offered” if it is:work, see Publication 946.
appropriate schedule. Deduct the expenses of
1. Continuously offered pursuant to a publicpreparing the remainder of the return on Sched-
offering,ule A (Form 1040), line 21. Excess Deductions of an Estate
2. Regularly traded on an established securi-
If an estate’s total deductions in its last tax yearties market, orOther Expenses (Line 22) are more than its gross income for that year, the
3. Held by or for at least 500 persons at allbeneficiaries succeeding to the estate’s prop-You can deduct certain other expenses as mis- times during the tax year.cellaneous itemized deductions subject to theerty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. These are A publicly offered mutual fund will send you aductions for the estate’s personal exemption
expenses you pay: Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orand charitable contributions when figuring the
a substitute form, showing the net amount ofestate’s total deductions. The beneficiaries can1. To produce or collect income that must be dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-claim the deduction only for the tax year inincluded in your gross income, ment expenses). This net figure is the amountwhich, or with which, the estate terminates,you report on your return as income. You cannot2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-whether the year of termination is a normal yeardeduct investment expenses.erty held for producing such income, oror a short tax year. For more information, see
Termination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi-3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re- Information returns.You should receive in-
fund of any tax. vors, Executors, and Administrators. formation returns from pass-through entities.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 191

Page 194 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Partnerships and S corporations.These • Casualty and theft losses fromRepayments of Income
income-producing property.entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the items
If you had to repay an amount that you includedand amounts you must report and identifies the • Federal estate tax on income in respect ofin income in an earlier year, you may be able totax return schedules and lines to use. a decedent.deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount you
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.These had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 or• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-
funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If itbling winnings.
stitute form, showing your share of gross incomewas more than $3,000, see Repayments Under • Impairment-related work expenses of per-and investment expenses. You can claim theClaim of Right under Deductions Not Subject to sons with disabilities.expenses only as a miscellaneous itemized de-the 2% Limit, later.
• Loss from other activities from Scheduleduction subject to the 2% limit.
K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2.
Repayments of Social Security • Repayments of more than $3,000 under aInvestment Fees and Expenses Benefits claim of right.
You can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,For information on how to deduct your repay-• Unrecovered investment in an annuity.
trust administration fees, and other expensesments of certain social security benefits, see
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap-you paid for managing your investments that Amortizable Premium on Taxableter 11.produce taxable income.
Bonds
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond isSafe Deposit Box RentLegal Expenses greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-
cess is bond premium. You can elect to amortizeYou can deduct safe deposit box rent if you useYou can usually deduct legal expenses that you
the premium on taxable bonds. The amortizationthe box to store taxable income-producingincur in attempting to produce or collect taxable of the premium is generally an offset to intereststocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andincome or that you pay in connection with the income on the bond rather than a separate de-documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youdetermination, collection, or refund of any tax. duction item.use the box only for jewelry, other personalYou can also deduct legal expenses that are:items, or tax-exempt securities. Part of the premium on some bonds may be
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2%1. Related to either doing or keeping your
limit. For more information, see Amortizablejob, such as those you paid to defendService Charges on Dividend Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529,yourself against criminal charges arisingReinvestment Plans and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 ofout of your trade or business, Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-You can deduct service charges you pay as a2. For tax advice related to a divorce, if the penses.subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.bill specifies how much is for tax adviceThese service charges include payments for:and it is determined in a reasonable way,
or Certain Casualty and Theft Losses1. Holding shares acquired through a plan,
3. To collect taxable alimony. You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a2. Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,
miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject toYou can deduct expenses of resolving tax and
the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen propertyissues relating to profit or loss from business3. Keeping individual records and providingwas income-producing property (property held(Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royalties detailed statements of accounts. for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First,(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. You report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. Youdeduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness tax may also have to include the loss on Form 4797Trustee’s Administrative Fees forissues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Tax if you are otherwise required to file that form. ToIRAPreparation Fees, earlier. figure your deduction, add all casualty or theft
losses from this type of property included onTrustee’s administrative fees that are billed sep-
Form 4684, lines 35 and 41b, or Form 4797, lineUnlawful discrimination claims.You may be arately and paid by you in connection with your
18a. For more information on casualty and theftindividual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-able to deduct, as an adjustment to income on
losses, see chapter 25.ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as aForm 1040, line 36, rather than as a miscellane-
miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to theous itemized deduction, attorney fees and court
2% limit. For more information about IRAs, seecosts for actions settled or decided after October Federal Estate Tax on Income inchapter 17.22, 2004, involving a claim of unlawful discrimi-
Respect of a Decedentnation, a claim against the U.S. Government, or
a claim made under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the You can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-Social Security Act. However, the amount you ble to income in respect of a decedent that youcan deduct on Form 1040, line 36, is limited toDeductions Not as a beneficiary include in your gross income.
the amount you included in gross income in Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-
2005 for that claim. The rest of your attorneySubject to the 2% Limitcome that the decedent would have received
fees and court costs for this type of claim are had death not occurred and that was not prop-
deductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduc- You can deduct the items listed below as miscel-erly includible in the decedent’s final income tax
laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub-tion subject to the 2% limit. See Publication 525 return. See Publication 559 for more informa-
ject to the 2% limit. Report these items onfor more information. tion.
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27.
Loss on Deposits Gambling Losses Up to theList of Deductions
Amount of Gambling WinningsFor information on whether, and if so, how, youEach of the following items is discussed in detailmay deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified You must report the full amount of your gamblingafter the list.
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You
Bankrupt Financial Institution in chapter 14. • Amortizable premium on taxable bonds. deduct your gambling losses for the year on
Page 192 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 195 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 27. You cannot entire investment is recovered tax free, any un- You cannot deduct travel expenses that do
deduct gambling losses that are more than your recovered investment can be deducted on thenot take you more than 100 miles from home as
winnings. retiree’s final income tax return. See chapter 10 an adjustment to gross income. Instead, you
for more information about the tax treatment ofmust complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and de-You cannot reduce your gambling pensions and annuities. duct those expenses as an itemized deductionwinnings by your gambling losses and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.report the difference. You must reportCAUTION
!
the full amount of your winnings as income andLoss From Other Activities Fromclaim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-
ords should show your winnings separately from NondeductibleIf the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (Formyour losses. 1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule AExpensesDiary of winnings and losses. You (Form 1040), line 27. It is not subject to the
must keep an accurate diary or similarpassive activity limitations. See the 2005Examples of nondeductible expenses are listedrecord of your losses and winnings. Partner’s Instructions For Schedule K-1 (FormRECORDS
next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-1065-B) for more information.Your diary should contain at least the following tional nondeductible expenses.information.
Officials Paid on a Fee List of NondeductibleBasis1. The date and type of your specific wager Expensesor wagering activity. If you are a fee-basis official, you can claim your
2. The name and address or location of theexpenses in performing services in that job as• Broker’s commissions that you paid ingambling establishment. an adjustment to income rather than as a miscel-connection with your IRA or other invest-
laneous itemized deduction. To qualify as a ment property.3. The names of other persons present
fee-basis official, you must be employed by awith you at the gambling establishment. • Burial or funeral expenses, including thestate or local government and be paid in whole
cost of a cemetery lot.  4. The amount(s) you won or lost. or in part on a fee basis.
• Capital expenses.See Publication 529 for more information.Where to report.If you qualify as a fee-basis
official, you should first complete Form 2106 or• Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses in marriage licenses, and dog tags.Impairment-Related Work performing services in that job (Form 2106, line• Hobby losses — But see Hobby Ex-Expenses 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6) on Form 1040, penses, earlier.line 24.If you have a physical or mental disability that • Home repairs, insurance, and rent.limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
Armed Forces Reservists • Illegal bribes and kickbacks—See Bribesits one or more of your major life activities, such
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, and kickbacks in chapter 13 of PublicationTraveling More Than 100
breathing, learning, and working, you can de- 535.
Miles From Homeduct your impairment-related work expenses. • Losses from the sale of your home, furni-Impairment-related work expenses are ordi- ture, personal car, etc.If you are a member of a reserve component ofnary and necessary business expenses for at-the Armed Forces of the United States and you• Personal disability insurance premiums.tendant care services at your place of work andtravel more than 100 miles away from home infor other expenses in connection with your place • Personal, living, or family expenses.connection with your performance of services asof work that are necessary for you to be able toa member of the reserves, you can deduct your• The value of wages never received or lostwork. travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in-vacation time.come rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedWhere to report.If you are an employee, youdeduction. The amount of expenses you canenter impairment-related work expenses ondeduct as an adjustment to gross income isAdoption ExpensesForm 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. Enter on Schedulelimited to the regular federal per diem rate (forA (Form 1040), line 27, that part of the amount You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting alodging, meals, and incidental expenses) andon Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, child, but you may be able to take a credit forthe standard mileage rate (for car expenses)that is related to your impairment. Enter the those expenses. See chapter 37.plus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. Foramount that is unrelated to your impairment onmore information, see Publication 463.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.
Member of a reserve component.You are a Campaign Expenses
member of a reserve component of the Armed
Repayments Under Claim of Right Forces of the United States if you are in theYou cannot deduct campaign expenses of a
Army, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coastcandidate for any office, even if the candidate isIf you had to repay more than $3,000 that youGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of therunning for reelection to the office. These in-included in your income in an earlier year be-United States, the Air National Guard of theclude qualification and registration fees for pri-cause at the time you thought you had an un-United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-mary elections.restricted right to it, you may be able to deductlic Health Service. Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal feesthe amount you repaid or take a credit against
paid to defend charges that arise from partici-Where to report.If you have reserve-relatedyour tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 for
pation in a political campaign.travel that takes you more than 100 miles frommore information.
home, you should first complete Form 2106 or
Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for
reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to
Check-Writing Fees on PersonalUnrecovered Investment in
the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, orAccountAnnuity
Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
If you have a personal checking account, youA retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu- line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on
cannot deduct fees charged by the bank for theity can exclude from income a part of each Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and
privilege of writing checks, even if the accountpayment received as a tax-free return of the deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on
pays interest.retiree’s investment. If the retiree dies before the Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20.
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 193

Page 196 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
policies assigned to your former spouse. SeeClub Dues 1. Custody of children.chapter 18 for information on alimony.
Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem- 2. Breach of promise to marry suit.
bership in any club organized for business, plea-
3. Civil or criminal charges resulting from asure, recreation, or other social purpose. ThisLobbying Expenses
personal relationship.includes business, social, athletic, luncheon,
You generally cannot deduct amounts paid orsporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. 4. Damages for personal injury.incurred for lobbying expenses. These includeFor exceptions, see Dues to Chambers of Com- 5. Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-expenses to:merce and Professional Societies under Un- tion of a title).reimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier.
6. Preparation of a will.1. Influence legislation,
7. Property claims or property settlement in a2. Participate or intervene in any politicalCommuting Expenses divorce.campaign for, or against, any candidate for
public office,You cannot deduct commuting expenses (the You cannot deduct these expenses even if a
cost of transportation between your home and result of the legal proceeding is the loss of3. Attempt to influence the general public, or
your main or regular place of work). If you haul income-producing property.segments of the public, about elections,
tools, instruments, or other items, in your car tolegislative matters, or referendums, or
and from work, you can deduct only the addi-4. Communicate directly with covered execu-Political Contributionstional cost of hauling the items such as the renttive branch officials in any attempt to influ-on a trailer to carry the items. ence the official actions or positions ofYou cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-
those officials. ical candidate, a campaign committee, or a
newsletter fund. Advertisements in conventionLobbying expenses also include any amountsFines or Penalties bulletins and admissions to dinners or programspaid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-
that benefit a political party or political candidateYou cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay toning, or coordination of any of these activities.
are not deductible.a governmental unit for violating a law. ThisDues used for lobbying. If a tax-exemptincludes an amount paid in settlement of yourorganization notifies you that part of the dues oractual or potential liability for a fine or penaltyother amounts you pay to the organization areProfessional Accreditation Fees(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties includeused to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de-you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex- You cannot deduct professional accreditationducted from teachers’ paychecks after an illegalpenses in Publication 529 for information onfees such as the following.strike. exceptions.
1. Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-
tial right to practice accounting.Health Spa Expenses Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property
2. Bar exam fees and incidental expenses inYou cannot deduct health spa expenses, even ifYou cannot deduct a loss based on the mere securing admission to the bar.there is a job requirement to stay in excellentdisappearance of money or property. However,3. Medical and dental license fees paid to getphysical condition, such as might be required ofan accidental loss or disappearance of propertyinitial licensing.a law enforcement officer. can qualify as a casualty if it results from an
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or
unusual. See chapter 25.
Home Security System Professional Reputation
Example. A car door is accidentallyYou cannot deduct the cost of a home securityslammed on your hand, breaking the setting of You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TVsystem as a miscellaneous deduction. However,your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the appearances to increase your personal prestigeyou may be able to claim a deduction for a homering and is never found. The loss of the diamond or establish your professional reputation.security system as a business expense if youis a casualty.
have a home office. See Home Office under
Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, and Relief Fund Contributions
Security System under Deducting Expenses in Lunches with Coworkers
Publication 587. You cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri-
You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-
co-workers, except while traveling away from ployee who cannot work because of any injury or
Homeowners’ Insurance Premiums home on business. See chapter 26 for informa- illness not related to the job.
tion on deductible expenses while traveling
You cannot deduct premiums that you pay oraway from home.
that are placed in escrow for insurance on your
Residential Telephone Service
home, such as fire and liability or mortgage
You cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)insurance. Meals While Working Late
for basic local telephone service for the first
You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work- telephone line to your residence, even if it is
ing late. However, you may be able to claim a used in a trade or business.
Investment-Related Seminars
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible
You cannot deduct any expenses for attending aentertainment expense, or if you are traveling
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-away from home. See chapter 26 for informationStockholders’ Meetings
vestment purposes. on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-
You cannot deduct transportation and other ex-penses while traveling away from home.
penses you pay to attend stockholders’ meet-
ings of companies in which you own stock butLife Insurance Premiums
have no other interest. You cannot deduct thesePersonal Legal Expenses
You cannot deduct premiums you pay on your expenses even if you are attending the meeting
life insurance. You may be able to deduct, asYou cannot deduct personal legal expenses to get information that would be useful in making
alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance such as those for the following. further investments.
Page 194 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 197 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to fund or a private fund. However, you can deductTax-Exempt Income Expenses
contributions as taxes if state law requires you tothe 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500).
You cannot deduct expenses to produce tax-ex- make them to a state unemployment fund that
empt income. You cannot deduct interest on a covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy-
debt incurred or continued to buy or carry ment caused by business conditions.Travel Expenses for Another
tax-exempt securities. IndividualIf you have expenses to produce both tax-
able and tax-exempt income, but you cannot WristwatchesYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses
identify the expenses that produce each type ofyou pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, orYou cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,income, you must divide the expenses based onother individual who accompanies you (or youreven if there is a job requirement that you knowthe amount of each type of income to determineemployee) on business travel. See chapter 26the correct time to properly perform your duties.the amount that you can deduct.
for more information on deductible travel ex-
penses.Example. During the year, you received
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-
est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had
Voluntary Unemploymenttotal expenses of $500 during the year. You
cannot identify the amount of each expense item
Benefit Fund Contributions
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80%
You cannot deduct voluntary unemployment($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable
interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the benefit fund contributions you make to a union
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 195

Page 198 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Before you figure the overall limit on itemized
deductions, you first must complete Schedule AWhich Itemized
(Form 1040), lines 1 through 27, including any29. related forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,Deductions
etc.).
Are Limited? The overall limit on itemized deductions is
Limit on figured after you have applied any other limit on
The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-the allowance of any itemized deduction. These
tions are subject to the overall limit on itemizedother limits include charitable contribution limitsItemized deductions. (chapter 24), the limit on certain meals and en-
tertainment (chapter 26), and the 2%-of-• Taxes—line 9.
Deductions adjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella-• Interest—lines 10, 11, and 12. neous deductions (chapter 28).
• Gifts to charity—line 18.
Itemized Deductions Worksheet.After youWhat’s New • Job expenses and most other miscellane-have completed Schedule A (Form 1040)ous deductions—line 26. through line 27, you can use the Itemized De-Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. • Other miscellaneous deductions—line 27,ductions Worksheet in the Instructions forThis Act provides tax relief for persons affectedexcluding gambling and casualty or theftSchedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit.by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may belosses. Enter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), lineable to treat certain gifts made by cash or check
28. Keep the worksheet for your records.as qualified contributions not subject to the limit
on itemized deductions. See Publication 4492. You should compare the amount of
your standard deduction to the
amount of your itemized deductionsWhich Itemized
TIP
after applying the limit. Use the greater amount
Deductions when completing Form 1040, line 40. See chap-Introduction
ter 20 for information on how to figure yourThis chapter discusses the overall limit on item-Are Not Limited? standard deduction.ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
The topics include: The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-Exampletions are not subject to the overall limit on item-• Who is subject to the limit,
ized deductions. However, they are still subjectFor tax year 2005, Bill and Terry Willow are filing• Which itemized deductions are limited,to other applicable limits. a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjustedand
• Medical and dental expenses—line 4. gross income on line 38 is $259,600. Their• How to figure the limit. Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows:• Investment interest expense—line 13.
• Gifts by cash or check made after AugustUseful Items Taxes—line 9.............. $ 17,90027, 2005, that you elect to treat as quali-You may want to see: fied contributions—line 15b. Interest—lines 10, 11, and 12 . . . 45,000
Form (and Instructions) • Casualty and theft losses from personal
Investment interest expenseuse property—line 19.
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized —line 13 ................. 41,000
• Casualty and theft losses fromDeductions
income-producing property—line 27. Gifts to charity—line 18....... 21,000
• Gambling losses—line 27. Job expenses—line 26........ 17,240
Total .................. $142,140Are You Subject
How Do You Figureto the Limit?
The Willows’ investment interest expense
the Limit?You are subject to the limit on certain itemized deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form
deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) 1040), line 13) is not subject to the overall limit
If your itemized deductions are subject to theis more than $145,950 ($72,975 if you are mar- on itemized deductions.limit, the total of all your itemized deductions isried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on The Willows use the Itemized Deductionsreduced by the smaller of:Form 1040, line 38. Worksheet in the Schedule A (Form 1040) in-
• 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-structions to figure their overall limit. Their com-
ceeds $145,950 ($72,975 if married filingpleted worksheet is shown as Table 29-1.
separately), or Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,
the Willows can deduct only $138,730• 80% of your itemized deductions that are
($142,140 − $3,410). They enter $138,730 onaffected by the limit. See Which Itemized
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.Deductions Are Limited, earlier.
Page 196 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 199 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 29-1.Itemized Deductions Worksheet—Line 28 Keep for your records
1. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 14, 18, 19, 26, and 27................. 1. 142,140
2. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 13, 15b, and 19, plus any gambling and
casualty or theft losses included on line 27............................................. 2. 41,000
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 27.CAUTION
!
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A, lineSTOP
28.
/H22076 Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1................................................. 3. 101,140
4. Multiply line 3 by 80% (.80)......................................... 4. 80,912
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38.............................. 5. 259,600
6. Enter: $145,950 ($72,975 if married filing separately)...................... 6. 145,950
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above onSTOP
Schedule A, line 28.
/H22076 Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5.................................. 7. 113,650
8. Multiply line 7 by 3% (.03)......................................... 8. 3,410
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8.................................................. 9. 3,410
10. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 9 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 28...................................................................... 10. 138,730
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 197

Page 200 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,600 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directly fromTaxes and your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the earned
income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to you in
Credits advance throughout the year.
• Investment income over $1,600 for chil- placed in service after October 22, 2004,
dren under age 14. (See chapter 31.) and Indian coal produced at facilities
placed in service after August 8, 2005.30. See Form 8835, Section B.Credits. After you figure your income tax and
any alternative minimum tax (discussed later),• Credit for fuel from a nonconventional
determine your tax credits. This chapter doessource, which is for the person who sold
How To Figure not explain whether you are eligible for thesethe fuel or who owned royalty interests
credits. You can find that information in chaptersand received income from the sale of fuel
32 through 37 and your form instructions. Seeproduced from a nonconventional source.Your Tax the following table for credits you may be able toSee Form 8907.
subtract from your income tax.
Other taxes.After you subtract your tax cred-Introduction CREDITS its, determine whether there are any other taxesSeeAfter you have figured your income and deduc- you must pay. This chapter does not explainFor information on: chapter:tions as explained in Parts One through Five, these other taxes. You can find that information
your next step is to figure your tax. This chapterAdoption.................. 3 7 in other chapters of this publication and your
discusses: Child and dependent care...... 3 2 form instructions. See the following table for
Child tax credit.............. 3 4 other taxes you may need to add to your income• The general steps you take to figure yourEducation................. 3 5 tax.tax, Elderly or disabled........... 3 3
Foreign tax................ 3 7• An additional tax you may have to pay
OTHER TAXESMortgage interest............ 3 7called the alternative minimum tax, and
SeePrior year minimum tax........ 3 7
• The conditions you must meet if you want For information on: chapter:Qualified electric vehicle....... 3 7
the IRS to figure your tax. Qualified retirement savings Additional taxes on qualified retirementcontributions.............. 3 7 plans and IRAs.............. 10, 17
Advance earned income creditSome credits (such as the earned income
payments ................. 3 6credit) are not listed above because they are
Household employment taxes..... 3 2treated as payments. See Payments, later. Recapture of an education credit . . . 35Figuring Your Tax There are other credits that are not dis-Social security and Medicare tax oncussed in this publication. These include theunreported tips.............. 6Your income tax is based on your taxable in-following items. Uncollected social security andcome. After you figure your income tax and any
Medicare tax on tips.......... 6• General business credit, which is made upalternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred-
of several separate business-related cred-its and add any other taxes you may owe. The Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-its. These generally are reported on Formresult is your total tax. Compare your total tax native minimum tax, is discussed later in this3800, General Business Credit, and arewith your total payments to determine whether chapter.discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334,you are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. There are other taxes that are not discussedTax Guide for Small Business.This section provides a general outline of
in this publication. These include the followinghow to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- items.directions in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ,nity employment credit, which is for certain
1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which taxemployers who are engaged in a business1. Self-employment tax. You must figure thisform you should file, see Which Form Should I in an empowerment zone, a renewal com- tax if either of the following applies to youUse? in chapter 1. munity, or the DC zone. See Publication (or your spouse if you file a joint return).954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Com-Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Tablemunities. Also see the instructions for a. Your net earnings from self-employ-or the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure Form 8844, Empowerment Zone and Re- ment from other than church employeetheir income tax. However, there are specialnewal Community Employment Credit. income were $400 or more. The termmethods if your income includes any of the fol-
“net earnings from self-employment”• District of Columbia first-time homebuyerlowing items.
may include certain nonemployee com-credit, which is for certain persons who• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.) pensation and other amounts reportedbuy a main home in the District. See the
to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellane-• Qualified dividends taxed at the same instructions for Form 8859, District of Co-
ous Income. If you received a Formrates as a net capital gain. (See chapter lumbia First-Time Homebuyer Credit.
1099-MISC, see the Instructions to Re-16.) • Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form cipients on the back. Also see the in-• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.) 6478. structions for Schedule SE (Form
1040), Self-Employment Tax; and Publi-• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule• Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In-
cation 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi-J (Form 1040), Income Averaging for dian coal production credit for electricity
ness.Farmers and Fishermen.) and refined coal produced at facilities
Page 198 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 201 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. You had church employee income of a member of your family from an expatri- You may have to pay the alternative mini-
$108.28 or more. mum tax if your taxable income for regular taxated corporation or its expanded affiliated
purposes, combined with certain adjustmentsgroup in which you were an officer, direc-
2. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay and tax preference items, is more than:tor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in-
these taxes if you previously claimed an formation, see the instructions for Form• $58,000 if your filing status is married filinginvestment credit, a low-income housing 1040, line 63. a joint return (or qualifying widow(er) withcredit, a mortgage interest credit, a new11. Additional tax on income you received dependent child),markets credit, a qualified electric vehiclefrom a nonqualified deferred compensationcredit, a credit for employer-provided child • $40,250 if your filing status is single orplan that fails to meet certain require-care facilities, or an Indian employment head of household, orments. This income should be shown incredit. For more information, see the in-Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Form• $29,000 if your filing status is married filingstructions for Form 1040, line 63. 1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa- a separate return.
3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If tion, see the instructions for Form 1040,
you are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi- line 63. Adjustments and tax preference items.Theness and you received a distribution that12. Interest on the tax due on installment in-more common adjustments and tax preferenceexceeds the benefits provided for you come from the sale of certain residentialitems include:under the qualified pension or annuity planlots and timeshares. For more information,formula, you may have to pay this addi- • Addition of personal exemptions,see the instructions for Form 1040, line 63.tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in
• Addition of the standard deduction (ifchapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement
claimed),Payments. After you determine your total tax,Plans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE,
figure the total payments you have alreadyand Qualified Plans). • Addition of itemized deductions claimedmade for the year. Include credits that are for state and local taxes, certain interest,4. Uncollected social security and Medicaretreated as payments. This chapter does not ex-most miscellaneous deductions, and parttax on group-term life insurance. If your plain these payments and credits. You can findof medical expenses,former employer provides you with morethat information in other chapters of this publica-than $50,000 of group-term life insurance • Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-tion and your form instructions. See the follow-coverage, you must pay the employee part cal taxes included in gross income,ing table for amounts you can include in yourof social security and Medicare taxes ontotal payments. • Changes to accelerated depreciation ofthose premiums. The amount should be
certain property,PAYMENTSshown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with
Seecodes M and N. • Difference between gain or loss on theFor information on: chapter: sale of property reported for regular tax5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This
Child tax credit (additional)...... 3 4 purposes and AMT purposes,tax applies if you received an “excess par-
Earned income credit......... 3 6achute payment” (EPP) due to a change in • Addition of certain income from incentiveEstimated tax paid........... 4a corporation’s ownership or control. See stock options,Excess social securitythe instructions for Form 1040, line 63. and RRTA tax withheld....... 3 7 • Change in certain passive activity loss de-
6. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts.Federal income tax withheld..... 4 ductions,
Health coverage tax credit...... 3 7This applies if you are the beneficiary of a
• Addition of certain depletion that is moreRegulated investment companytrust that accumulated its income instead
than the adjusted basis of the property,credit................... 3 7of distributing it currently. See the instruc-
Tax paid with extension........ 1tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation • Addition of part of the deduction for certain
Distribution of Trusts. intangible drilling costs, andAnother credit that is treated as a payment is
the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.7. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If • Addition of tax-exempt interest on certainThis credit is for persons who have a nontaxableamounts contributed to, or distributed from, private activity bonds.use of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel andyour health savings account or medical
kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 70.savings account do not meet the rules for
More information. For more informationSee Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid onthese accounts, you may have to pay addi-
about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-Fuels.tional taxes. See Publication 969, Health
structions for Form 1040, line 45, and FormSavings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals.Refund or balance due. To determineHealth Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs
whether you are entitled to a refund or oweand Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts;
additional tax, compare your total payments withForm 8889, Health Savings Accounts
your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes
your form instructions for information on havingon Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and Tax Figured by IRSit directly deposited into your checking or sav-Other Tax-Favored Accounts.
ings account instead of receiving a paper check.If you file by April 17, 2006, you can have the8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap-
IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,plies if amounts contributed to, or distrib-
Form 1040A, or Form 1040.uted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet
If the IRS figures your tax and you paid toothe rules for these accounts. See Publica-
Alternative much, you will receive a refund. If you did nottion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and
pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-Form 5329.
Minimum Tax ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for late9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days ofgrams. This applies to amounts distributedThis section briefly discusses an additional taxthe date of the bill or by the due date for yourfrom qualified tuition programs that do notyou may have to pay. return, whichever is later.meet the rules for these accounts. See The tax law gives special treatment to somePublication 970 and Form 5329. kinds of income and allows special deductionsWhen the IRS cannot figure your tax.The
and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-10. Tax on insider stock compensation from an IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the
ers who benefit from the law in these ways mayexpatriated corporation. You may owe a following apply.
have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax15% excise tax on the value of nonstatu-
through an additional tax. This additional tax istory stock options and certain other 1. You want your refund directly deposited
called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).stock-based compensation held by you or into your account.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 199

Page 202 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. You want any part of your refund applied Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to figure it for you. Enter “EIC” to the left of the entry
to your 2006 estimated tax. your return. Also attach any Form 1099-R you space for line 41a. Enter the nontaxable combat
received that has withholding tax in box 4.pay you elect to include in earned income on line3. You had income for the year from sourcesMail your return to the Internal Revenue41b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill inother than wages, salaries, tips, interest,Service Center for the area where you live. A listSchedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-dividends, taxable social security benefits,of Service Center addresses is shown near thetach it to your return.unemployment compensation, IRA distri-end of this publication. If your credit for any year after 1996 wasbutions, pensions, and annuities. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
Form 1040EZ Line Entries Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with5. You itemize deductions.
your return. For details, see the Form 1040ARead lines 1 through 8b and fill in the lines that6. You file any of the following forms. instructions.apply to you. Do not complete lines 9 through
a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. 12. If you are filing a joint return, use the space
to the left of line 6 to separately show yourb. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Form 1040 Line Entriestaxable income and your spouse’s taxable in-Exclusion. come. Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines thatc. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- apply to you. Do not complete line 44.Earned income credit. If you can take thiscare Tax on Unreported Tip Income. If you are filing a joint return, use the spacecredit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS canunder the words “Adjusted Gross Income” ond. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri-figure it for you. Enter “EIC” in the space to thethe front of your return to separately show yourbution of Trusts. left of line 8a. Enter the nontaxable combat paytaxable income and your spouse’s taxable in-you elect to include in earned income on line 8b.e. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu- come.If your credit for any year after 1996 wastions. Read lines 45 through 70. Fill in the lines thatreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsof. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. apply to you, but do not fill in lines 56, 63, andhave to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
71. Also, do not complete line 57 and lines 72Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withg. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— through 76. Do not fill in lines 49 and 66a if youyour return. For details, see the Form 1040EZIndividuals. want the IRS to figure the credits shown oninstructions.h. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. those lines.
Fill in any forms or schedules asked for oni. Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age
the lines you completed, and attach them to yourForm 1040A Line Entries14 With Investment Income of More
return.Than $1,600.
Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that
j. Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Reportapply to you. If you are filing a joint return, useCredit for child and dependent care
Child’s Interest and Dividends. the space to the left of line 27 to separately showexpenses. If you can take this credit, as dis-
your taxable income and your spouse’s taxablecussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441 andk. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex-
income. Do not complete line 28. Complete linesattach it to your return. Enter the amount of thepenses.
29 through 33, 37, and 39 through 42 if theycredit on line 48. The IRS will not figure this
l. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and apply to you. Do not fill in lines 30 and 41a if youcredit.
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.want the IRS to figure the credits shown on
those lines. Also, enter any write-in informationCredit for the elderly or the disabled.If youm. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts
that applies to you in the space to the left of line can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,(HSAs).
43. Do not complete lines 35, 36, 38, and 43 attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or the
n. Form 8915, Qualified Hurricane Katrinathrough 48. Disabled. Enter “CFE” on the dotted line next to
Retirement Plan Distributions and Re- Form 1040, line 49. The IRS will figure the credit
Credit for child and dependent carepayments. for you. On Schedule R check the box in Part I
expenses. If you can take this credit, as dis-for your filing status and age. Complete Part II
cussed in chapter 32, complete Schedule 2 andand Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.
attach it to your return. Enter the amount of theFiling the Return credit on line 29 (Form 1040A). The IRS will notEarned income credit. If you can take this
figure this credit. credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willAfter you complete the line entries for the tax
figure it for you. Enter “EIC” on the dotted lineform you are filing, as discussed next, attach theCredit for the elderly or the disabled.If you next to Form 1040, line 66a. Enter the nontax-peel-off label. If you do not have a peel-off label,can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,able combat pay you elect to include in earnedfill in your name and address. Enter your socialattach Schedule 3 (Form 1040A), Credit for theincome on line 66b. If you have a qualifyingsecurity number in the space provided. If you areElderly or the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers.child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach itmarried, enter the social security numbers ofEnter “CFE” next to line 30 (Form 1040A). Theto your return.you and your spouse. Complete the “Third PartyIRS will figure this credit for you. On Schedule 3,If your credit for any year after 1996 wasDesignee” area of the return if you would likecheck the box in Part I for your filing status andreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoanother person to discuss your return with theage. Complete Part II and Part III, lines 11 andhave to file Form 8862, Information To ClaimIRS. Sign and date your return and enter your13, if they apply. Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, withoccupation(s). If you are filing a joint return, both
your return. For details, see the Form 1040 in-you and your spouse must sign it. Enter yourEarned income credit. If you can take this
structions.daytime phone number in the space provided. credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS will
Page 200 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 203 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Which Parent’s Parent’s Election31. Return To Use To Report Child’s
If a child’s parents are married to each other andInterest and DividendsTax on file a joint return, use the joint return to figure the
tax on the investment income of a child underYou may be able to elect to include your child’s
interest and dividend income (including capitalage 14. The tax rate and other return informationInvestment gain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,from that return are used to figure the child’s tax
your child will not have to file a return.as explained later under Tax for Children Under
Income of Age 14 Who Have Investment Income of More You can make this election for 2005 only if all
Than $1,600. the following conditions are met.
Certain Minor • Your child was under age 14 at the end ofParents Who Do Not File a 2005. (A child born on January 1,1992, is
considered to be age 14 at the end ofJoint ReturnChildren
2005. You cannot make the election for
For parents who do not file a joint return, thethis child.)
following discussions explain which parent’s tax• Your child is required to file a return forIntroduction return must be used to figure the tax. 2005, unless you make this election.
Only the parent whose tax return is used canThis chapter discusses the following two rules
• Your child had income only from interestmake the election described under Parent’sthat may affect the tax on certain investment
and dividends (including capital gain distri-income of a child under age 14. Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-
butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-dends. dends).1. If the child’s interest and dividend income
total less than $8,000, the child’s parentParents are married.If the child’s parents file• The dividend and interest income was lessmay be able to choose to include that in- than $8,000.separate returns, use the return of the parentcome (including capital gain distributions)with the greater taxable income. • No estimated tax payment was made foron the parent’s return rather than file a
2005 and no 2004 overpayment was ap-return for the child. (See Parent’s Election Parents not living together.If the child’s
plied to 2005 under your child’s name andTo Report Child’s Interest and Dividends,parents are married to each other but not living
social security number.later.) together, and the parent with whom the child
lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar-• No federal income tax was taken out of2. If the child’s interest, dividends, and otherried, use the return of the custodial parent. If theyour child’s income under the backup with-investment income total more than $1,600,custodial parent is not considered unmarried,holding rules.part of that income may be taxed at the
use the return of the parent with the greaterparent’s tax rate instead of the child’s tax • You are the parent whose return must betaxable income.rate. (See Tax for Children Under Age 14 used when applying the special tax rulesFor an explanation of when a married personWho Have Investment Income of More for children under age 14. (See Whichliving apart from his or her spouse is consideredThan $1,600, later.) Parent’s Return To Use, earlier.)unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2.For these rules, the term “child” includes a le- These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.gally adopted child and a stepchild. These rulesParents are divorced.If the child’s parentsapply whether or not the child is a dependent. How to make the election.Make the electionare divorced or legally separated, and the parentThese rules do not apply if: by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040 orwho had custody of the child for the greater part
Form 1040NR. (If you make this election, you• The child is not required to file a tax re-of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar-
cannot file Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) At-turn, or ried, use the return of the custodial parent.
tach a separate Form 8814 for each child for• Neither of the child’s parents were living atCustodial parent remarried.If the custo-whom you make the election. You can make thethe end of the tax year. dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (ratherelection for one or more children and not for
than the noncustodial parent) is treated as theothers.
child’s other parent. Therefore, if the custodialUseful Items parent and the stepparent file a joint return, useYou may want to see: Effect of Making thethat joint return. Do not use the return of the
Electionnoncustodial parent.Publication
If the custodial parent and the stepparent are
The federal income tax on your child’s income❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and married, but file separate returns, use the returnmay be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-Dependents of the one with the greater taxable income. If thetion.custodial parent and the stepparent are married
Form (and Instructions) but not living together, the earlier discussionRate may be higher. If your child receivedunder Parents not living together applies.❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 With qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
Investment Income of More Than you may pay up to $40 more tax if you make thisParents never married.If a child’s parents$1,600 election instead of filing a separate tax return fordid not marry each other, but lived together allthe child. This is because the tax rate on the❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’syear, use the return of the parent with thechild’s income between $800 and $1,600 is 10%Interest and Dividends greater taxable income. If the parents did not liveif you make this election. However, if you file a
together all year, the rules explained earlierseparate return for the child, the tax rate may be
under Parents are divorced apply. as low as 5% because of the preferential tax
rates for qualified dividends and capital gain
Widowed parent remarried. If a widow or distributions.
widower remarries, the new spouse is treated as
the child’s other parent. The rules explainedDeductions you cannot take.By making the
earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply. Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 201

Page 204 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
following deductions that the child would be enti-
tled to on his or her return.
• The higher standard deduction for a blind
child.
• The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child’s savings.
• Itemized deductions (such as your child’s
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits.If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
• Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
• Deduction for student loan interest.
• Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Total itemized deductions.
• Personal exemptions.
• Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
• Child tax credit.
• Education tax credits.
• Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2005 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2006, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information.
Figuring Child’s Income
Use Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child’s
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,600 is added to
your income. This amount is shown on Form
8814, line 6. Include this amount on Form 1040
or Form 1040NR, line 21 . Enter “Form 8814” in
the space next to line 21. If you file more than
one Form 8814, include the total amounts from
line 6 of all your Forms 8814 on Form 1040 or
Form 1040NR, line 21.
Capital gain distributions and qualified
dividends. If your child’s dividend income in-
cluded any capital gain distributions see Capital
gain distributions under Figuring Child’s Income
in Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child’s divi-
dend income included any qualified dividends,
see Qualified dividends under Figuring Child’s
Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 14
at the end of 2005?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2005 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$8,000?
/H17074
Yes
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2005?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2004 return applied to the
2005 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Figuring Additional Tax This additional tax is the smaller of: Include the amount from line 9 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44, orUse Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the1. 10% × (your child’s gross income − $800), Form 1040NR, line 41. Check box a on Form$1,600 of your child’s interest and dividends thator 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income. 2. $80.
Page 202 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 205 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$16,093 total on line 44 of Form 1040, and
checks box a.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.
Child’s Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Distributions Worksheet
(Keep for your records)
1. Enter the amount of qualified
dividends included on
Form 8814, line 2......... $1,150
2. Enter the amount from
Form 8814, line 3......... 0
3. Enter the amount from
Form 8814, line 4......... 2,800
4. Divide line 1 by line 3. Enter
the result as a decimal
(rounded to at least 3 places) .411
5. Divide line 2 by line 3. Enter
the result as a decimal
(rounded to at least 3 places) .000
6. Base amount............ $ 1,600
7. Subtract line 6 from line 3 . . . 1,200
8. Multiply line 7 by line 4.
Include this amount on Form
1040, lines 9a and 9b, or
Form 1040NR, lines 10a and
10b. On the dotted lines next
to those lines, enter “Form
8814” and this amount (unless
you file Schedule B (Form
1040); in that case, follow the
instructions in the Note on
this line). Also, enter “QD” (for
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 14 at the end of 2005?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2005?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,600?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
“qualified dividends”) and this
amount on the dotted line next
tions Worksheet to figure the amount to enter onto line 6 of Form 8814.Illustrated Example line 6, instead of subtracting line 5 from line 4.Note. If this amount plus the
The amount she enters on line 6 is $707, the parents’ dividends is moreDavid and Linda Parks are married and will file
than $1,500, report thisamount from line 11 of the worksheet. On theseparate tax returns for 2005. Their only child,
amount on Schedule Bdotted line next to line 6, she enters “QD–$493,”Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT (Form 1040). Show it asthe amount from line 8 of the worksheet. Sheshowing $1,650 taxable interest income and a from “Form 8814”......... 4 9 3includes that amount ($493) on lines 9a and 9bForm 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi-
of her Form 1040. On the dotted line next to linesdends. All the dividends were qualified divi- 9. Multiply line 7 by line 5.
9a and 9b, she enters “Form 8814–$493.” Include this amount ondends. His parents decide to include that
Schedule D, line 13;income on one of their returns so they will notLinda includes $707 in the total on line 21 of
Form 1040, line 13, orhave to file a return for Philip. her Form 1040 (not illustrated), and in the space
Form 1040NR, line 14.First, David and Linda each figure their tax-next to that line enters “Form 8814–$707.” Ad-Enter “Form 8814” andable income (Form 1040, line 43) without regardding that amount, plus the $493 of qualified this amount on theto Philip’s income. David’s taxable income isdividends, to her income increases each of thedotted line next to line 13 of$56,700 and Linda’s is $74,300. Because heramounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of herSchedule D, or in thetaxable income is greater, Linda can elect toForm 1040 by $1,200. Linda is not claiming anyspace to the left of line 13include Philip’s income on her return. See Which deductions or credits that are affected by theof Form 1040 or line 14Parent’s Return To Use, earlier. increase to her income. Therefore, her revisedof Form 1040NR.On Form 8814 (see illustrated form), Lindataxable income on line 43 is $75,500 ($74,300 +Also, enter “CGD” (forenters her name and social security number, “capital gain distribution”)$493 + $707).then Philip’s name and social security number. and this amount on theOn Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $800She enters Philip’s taxable interest income, dotted line next to line 6 ofshown on line 7 from the $2,800 on line 4 and$1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt Form 8814.............. 0enters the result, $2,000, on line 8. Because thatinterest income, so she leaves line 1b blank. 10. Add lines 8 and 9......... 4 9 3amount is not less than $800, she enters $80 onShe enters Philip’s ordinary dividends, $1,150,
line 9. This is the tax on the first $1,600 ofon line 2. Philip did not have any capital gain 11. Subtract line 10 from line 7.
Philip’s income, which Linda did not have to addEnter the result here and ondistributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
to her income. She must add this additional taxForm 8814, line 6......... 7 0 7Linda adds lines 1a and 2 and enters the
to the tax figured on her revised taxable income.result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had
The tax on her $75,500 revised taxable in-qualified dividends, Linda must use the Child’s
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Distribu- come is $16,013. She adds $80, and enters the
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 203

Page 206 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
1,650
2,800
707
2,000
80
1,150
/H12011
QD - $493
1,600 00
800 00
OMB No. 1545-0074Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2 Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2, and 3. If the total is $1,600 or less, skip lines 5 and 6 and go to line 7. If the
total is $8,000 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to report
the income
3
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4. See the instructions for where to report this amount. Go to line 7
below /H170756
Tax on the First $1,600 of Child’s Interest and Dividends
Amount not taxed
9
77
Subtract line 7 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $80 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 8 less than $800?
8 8
Yes. Multiply line 8 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note. If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 9 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3. Form 8814 (2005)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
3
6
2
5
Part I
Part II
9
Caution. The federal income tax on your child’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain distributions, may be less
if you file a separate tax return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax be nefits
that your child could take on his or her own return. For details, see Tax benefits you may not take on page 2.
2005
Page 204 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 207 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instead of using estimates, you can get an The dividends were qualified dividends on stock
automatic 6-month extension of time to file if, by given to her by her grandparents.Tax for Children UnderApril 17, 2006, you file Form 4868, ApplicationAmanda’s investment income is $1,900. Thisfor Automatic Extension of Time to File U.S.is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter-Age 14 Who Have Individual Income Tax Return. Extensions areest ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Herdiscussed in chapter 1. wages are earned (not investment) income be-Investment Income of
cause they are received for work actually done.
Step 1. Figuring the Her tax-exempt interest is not included becauseMore Than $1,600
it is nontaxable.Child’s Net InvestmentPart of a child’s 2005 investment income may be Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary ofIncomesubject to tax at the parent’s tax rate if all of the a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-following statements are true. (Form 8615, Part I) dends, capital gains, and other investment in-
come from the trust are investment income to• The child was under age 14 at the end ofThe first step in figuring a child’s tax using Formthe child.2005. (A child born on January 1, 1992, is8615 is to figure the child’s net investment in-considered to be age 14 at the end ofcome. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I. Line 2 (deductions).If the child does not2005. This child’s investment income is itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040not taxed at the parent’s rate.) Line 1 (investment income).If the child hador Form 1040NR), enter $1,600 on line 2.
no earned income, enter on this line the adjusted• The child’s investment income was more If the child does itemize deductions, enter on
gross income shown on the child’s return. Ad-than $1,600. line 2 the larger of:
justed gross income is shown on Form 1040,
• The child is required to file a return forline 38; Form 1040A, line 22; or Form 1040NR,1. $800 plus the child’s itemized deductions2005. line 36. Form 1040EZ and Form 1040NR-EZ that are directly connected with the pro-
cannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed. duction of investment income entered onThese conditions are also shown in Figure
If the child had earned income, figure theline 1, or31-B .
amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by using2. $1,600.If neither parent was alive on December 31,the worksheet in the instructions for the form.2005, do not use Form 8615. Instead, figure theHowever, if the child has excluded any for-Directly connected.Itemized deductionschild’s tax in the normal manner. eign earned income or deducted either a lossare directly connected with the production ofIf the parent does not or cannot choose tofrom self-employment or a net operating lossinvestment income if they are for expenses paidinclude the child’s income on the parent’s return,from another year, use the Alternate Worksheetto produce or collect taxable income or to man-use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attachfor Form 8615, line 1, in Publication 929 to figureage, conserve, or maintain property held forthe completed form to the child’s Form 1040,the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1.producing income. These expenses includeForm 1040A, or Form 1040NR. custodian fees and service charges, serviceInvestment income defined. InvestmentThe following discussions explain the paren- fees to collect taxable interest and dividends,income is generally all income other than sala-tal information needed for Form 8615 and the and certain investment counsel fees.ries, wages, and other amounts received as paysteps to follow in figuring the child’s tax. Form These expenses are added to certain otherfor work actually done. It includes taxable inter-8615 is illustrated later. miscellaneous itemized deductions on Scheduleest, dividends, capital gains (including capital
A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater thangain distributions), the taxable part of social se-
2% of the child’s adjusted gross income can beProviding Parental curity and pension payments, and certain distri-
deducted. See chapter 28 for more information.butions from trusts. Investment income includesInformation amounts produced by assets the child obtained
Example 1. Roger, age 12, has investment(Form 8615, lines A–C) with earned income (such as interest on a sav-
income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust-ings account into which the child deposited
On Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent’s ments to income, and itemized deductions ofwages).
name and social security number. (If the parents $300 (net of the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeNontaxable income. For this purpose, in-filed a joint return, enter the name and social limit) that are directly connected with his invest-vestment income includes only amounts that thesecurity number listed first on the joint return.) ment income. His adjusted gross income ischild must include in total income. NontaxableOn line C, check the box for the parent’s filing $8,000, which is entered on Form 1040, line 38,investment income, such as tax-exempt intereststatus. and on Form 8615, line 1. Line 2 is $1,600and the nontaxable part of social security andbecause that is more than the sum of $800 andSee Which Parent’s Return To Use at the pension payments, is not included. his directly-connected itemized deductions ofbeginning of this chapter for information on
$300.Income from property received as a gift.which parent’s return information must be used
A child’s investment income includes all incomeon Form 8615.
Example 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investmentproduced by property belonging to the child.Parent with different tax year.If the parent income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-This is true even if the property was transferredand the child do not have the same tax year, alty of $100. She has no other income. She hasto the child, regardless of when the property was
complete Form 8615 using the information on itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of thetransferred or purchased or who transferred it.
the parent’s return for the tax year that ends in 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) that are di-A child’s investment income includes incomethe child’s tax year. rectly connected with the production of her in-produced by property given as a gift to the child.
vestment income. Her adjusted gross income,This includes gifts to the child from grandparentsParent’s return information not known
entered on line 1, is $15,900 ($16,000 − $100).or any other person and gifts made under thetimely. If the information needed from the
The amount on line 2 is $1,850. This is the largerUniform Gift to Minors Act.parent’s return is not known by the time the
of:child’s return is due (usually April 15), you can
Example. Amanda Black, age 13, receivedfile the return using estimates. 1. $800 plus the $1,050 of directly connectedthe following income.You can use any reasonable estimate. This itemized deductions, orincludes using information from last year’s re-• Dividends — $600 2. $1,600.turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form
• Wages — $2,1008615, enter “Estimated” on the line next to the
amount. Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the• Taxable interest — $1,200
When you get the correct information, file an result on this line. If zero or less, do not complete• Tax-exempt interest — $100amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S. the rest of the form. However, you must still
Individual Income Tax Return. • Net capital gains — $100. attach Form 8615 to the child’s tax return. Figure
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 205

Page 208 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tax on the child’s taxable income in theOther children’s information not available.Illustrated Examplenormal manner. If the net investment income of the other children
is not available when the return is due, either fileThe following example includes a completed
Line 4 (child’s taxable income).Enter on linethe return using estimates or get an extension ofForm 8615. Form 1040A is not shown.4 the child’s taxable income from Form 1040,time to file. See Parent’s return information notJohn and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,known timely, earlier. She is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in-line 40.
come and $1,500 earned income. She does not
Line 11 (tentative tax).Subtract line 10 fromitemize deductions. John and Laura file a jointLine 5 (net investment income).A child’s net
line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is thereturn with John’s name and social securityinvestment income cannot be more than his or
tentative tax. number listed first. They claim three exemp-her taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5,
the smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child’s tions, including an exemption for Sara, on theirIf line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and
net investment income. return.enter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Also
If zero or less, do not complete the rest of the skip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b thatBecause Sara is under age 14 and has more
form. However, you must still attach Form 8615follows. than $1,600 investment income, part of her in-
to the child’s tax return. Figure the tax on the come may be subject to tax at her parents’ rate.
child’s taxable income in the normal manner. A completed Form 8615 must be attached to herLines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentative
return.tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divide
Step 2. Figuring Sara’s father, John, fills out Sara’s return forthe tentative tax shown on line 11 among the
her. He completes her Form 1040A through linechildren according to each child’s share of theTentative Tax at
total net investment income. This is done on 27, then begins completing her Form 8615.the Parent’s Tax Rate lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7John enters his name and social security
(Form 8615, Part II) to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on linenumber on Sara’s Form 8615 because his name
12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amountand number are listed first on the joint return heThe next step in completing Form 8615 is toon line 12a and enter the result as a decimal onand Laura are filing. He checks the box forfigure a tentative tax on the child’s net invest-line 12b. married filing jointly.ment income at the parent’s tax rate. The tenta-
He enters Sara’s investment income,tive tax at the parent’s tax rate is the differenceExample. In the earlier example under Line
between the tax on the parent’s taxable income $2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc-7 (net investment income of other children),figured with the child’s net investment income tions, so John enters $1,600 on line 2. He entersSharon’s Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.(plus the net investment income of any other $1,200 ($2,800 − $1,600) on line 3.The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, thechild whose Form 8615 includes the tax return Sara’s taxable income, as shown on hertotal of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 +information of that parent) and the tax figured Form 1040A, line 27, is $2,550. This is her total$1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figuredwithout it. income ($4,300) minus her standard deductionas follows and rounded to three places.When figuring the tentative tax at the ($1,750). Her standard deduction is limited to$800parent’s tax rate, do not refigure any of the the amount of her earned income plus $250.= .333exclusions, deductions, or credits on the $2,400 John enters $2,550 on line 4.parent’s return because of the child’s net invest-
John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters thement income. For example, do not refigure the
smaller amount, $1,200, on line 5.medical expense deduction. Step 3. Figuring
John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is the Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, linesthe Child’s Tax taxable income from line 43 of John and Laura’s6 through 13.
joint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, so(Form 8615, Part III)
line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($1,200), line 6Note. If the child has any capital gains or
The final step in figuring a child’s tax using Formlosses, get Publication 929 for help in complet- ($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and enters
8615 is to determine the larger of:ing Form 8615, Part II. $49,200 on line 8.
Using the column for married filing jointly inLine 7 (net investment income of other chil-1. The total of: the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,200. Hedren). If the tax return information of the par- enters the tax, $6,654, on line 9. He entersa. The child’s share of the tentative taxent is also used on any other child’s Form 8615, $6,474 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 ofbased on the parent’s tax rate, plusenter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line John and Laura’s Form 1040. He enters $180 on5 of all the other children’s Forms 8615. Do notb. The tax on the child’s taxable income inline 11 ($6,654 − $6,474).include the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615excess of net investment income, fig- Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12abeing completed. ured at the child’s tax rate, or and 12b and enters $180 on line 13.
Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon have John subtracts line 5 ($1,200) from line 42. The tax on the child’s taxable income, fig-three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who ($2,550) and enters the result, $1,350, on lineured at the child’s tax rate.must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The 14. Using the column for single filing status inThis is the child’s tax. It is figured on Formchildren’s net investment income amounts on the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,350 andline 5 of their Forms 8615 are: 8615, lines 14 through 18. enters this tax, $136, on line 15. He adds lines
13 ($180) and 15 ($136) and enters $316 on line• Sharon — $800
Alternative minimum tax. A child may be 16.• Jerry — $600 subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he orUsing the column for single filing status in theshe has certain items given preferential treat-• Mike — $1,000 Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,550 (line 4)ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-and enters this tax, $256, on line 17.Line 7 of Sharon’s Form 8615 will show mum Tax in chapter 30.
John compares lines 16 and 17 and enters$1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 ofFor more information on who is liable forthe larger amount, $316, on line 18 of Sara’sJerry’s and Mike’s Forms 8615. AMT and how to figure it, get Form 6251, Alter-Form 8615. He also enters that amount on lineLine 7 of Jerry’s Form 8615 will show $1,800native Minimum Tax—Individuals. For informa-28 of Sara’s Form 1040A.($800 + $1,000). tion on special limits that apply to a child who
John also completes Schedule 1 (Formfiles Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax inLine 7 of Mike’s Form 8615 will show $1,400 1040A) for Sara.($800 + $600). Publication 929.
Page 206 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 209 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,800
1,600
1,200
2,550
1,200
48,000
49,200
6,654
6,474
180
1,350
136
316
256
316
180
OMB No. 1545-0074Tax for Children Under Age 14
With Investment Income of More Than $1,600
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter $1,600.
Otherwise, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR,
line 40
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do
attach it to the child’s return
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 40; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or less, enter -0-
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8Add lines 5, 6, and 7 (see instructions). 8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here
/H17075
9
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative minimum
tax; Form 1040EZ, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not include any
tax from Form 4972 or 8814. If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D
Tax Worksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) was used to figure the tax, check here /H17075 10
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places)b
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here
/H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here
/H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A,
line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 41 18
Form 8615 (2005)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children under age 14 must use the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet or has income from farming or fishing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040).
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
2005
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 207

Page 210 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be able to claim the credit if you pay 4. You must make payments for child and
dependent care to someone neither yousomeone to care for your dependent who is
nor your spouse can claim as a depen-under age 13 or for your spouse or dependent
dent. If you make payments to your child,32. who is not able to care for himself or herself. The
he or she cannot be your dependent andcredit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To
must be age 19 or older by the end of thequalify, you must pay these expenses so you
year. You cannot make payments to yourcan work or look for work.
spouse or to the parent of your qualifyingChild and This credit should not be confused child who is your qualifying person and is
with the child tax credit discussed inunder age 13. (See Payments to Relatives
chapter 34.CAUTION
!Dependent Care or Dependents under Work-Related Ex-
pense Test, later.)
Dependent care benefits.If you received any5. Your filing status must be single, head ofCredit dependent care benefits from your employer household, qualifying widow(er) with de-during the year, you may be able to exclude frompendent child, or married filing jointly. Youyour income all or part of them. You must com-must file a joint return if you are married,plete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Formunless an exception applies to you. (SeeWhat’s New 1040A) before you can figure the amount of yourJoint Return Test, later.)
credit. See Dependent Care Benefits under HowKeeping up home test eliminated.Gener- 6. You must identify the care provider on yourTo Figure the Credit, later.ally, you no longer need to pay over half the cost tax return. (See Provider Identification
of keeping up a home for a qualifying person. Test, later.)Useful ItemsHowever, the qualifying person must live with 7. If you exclude or deduct dependent careYou may want to see:you for more than half of 2005. See Qualifying benefits provided by a dependent carePerson Test for more information. benefits plan, the total amount you excludePublication
or deduct must be less than the dollar limitQualifying person.To be your qualifying per-❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000son, a child generally must be your “qualifying and Filing Information if one qualifying person was cared for orchild.” See Qualifying Person Test, later.
$6,000 if two or more qualifying persons❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care
Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. were cared for). (If two or more qualifyingExpenses
This Act provides tax relief for persons affected persons were cared for, the amount you
❏ 926 Household Employer’s Tax Guideby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, the special exclude or deduct will always be less than
the dollar limit, since the amount you canrule for a spouse who is a full-time student may
Form (and Instructions) exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. Seestill apply if he or she was unable to attend
Reduced Dollar Limit under How To Figureclasses because of Hurricane Katrina. See Pub-❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Care
the Credit, later.)lication 4492. Expenses
These tests are presented in Figure 32-A and❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A)Child and
are also explained in detail in this chapter.Dependent Care Expenses for
Form 1040A Filers
Reminders ❏ Schedule H (Form 1040)Household
Qualifying Person TestEmployment Taxes
Taxpayer identification number needed for
❏ W-7 Application for IRS Individualeach qualifying person.You must include on Your child and dependent care expenses must
Taxpayer Identification Numberline 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) be for the care of one or more qualifying per-
the name and taxpayer identification number sons.❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider’s
(generally the social security number) of each Identification and Certification A qualifying person is:
qualifying person. See Taxpayer identification
number under Qualifying Person Test, later. 1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-
dent and who was under age 13 when theYou may have to pay employment taxes.If care was provided,you pay someone to come to your home and Tests To Claim 2. Your spouse who was physically or men-care for your dependent or spouse, you may be
tally not able to care for himself or herselfa household employer who has to pay employ-the Credit and lived with you for more than half thement taxes. Usually, you are not a household
year, oremployer if the person who cares for your de-To be able to claim the credit for child andpendent or spouse does so at his or her home or 3. A person who was physically or mentallydependent care expenses, you must file Formplace of business. See Employment Taxes for not able to care for himself or herself, lived1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, andHousehold Employers, later. with you for more than half the year, andmeet all the following tests.
either:
1. The care must be for one or more qualify-
a. Was your dependent, oring persons who are identified on the form
you use to claim the credit. (See Qualifying b. Would have been your dependent ex-Introduction
Person Test.) cept that (i) he or she received grossThis chapter discusses the credit for child and income of $3,200 or more, (ii) he or she2. You (and your spouse if you are married)dependent care expenses and covers the fol- filed a joint return, or (iii) you, or yourmust have earned income during the year.lowing topics. spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed(However, see Rule for student-spouse or as a dependent on someone else’sspouse not able to care for self under• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. 2005 return.Earned Income Test, later.)• How to figure the credit.
3. You must pay child and dependent care If you are divorced or separated, see Child of• How to claim the credit. expenses so you (and your spouse if youdivorced or separated parents, later, to deter-
are married) can work or look for work.• Employment taxes you may have to pay mine which parent may treat the child as a quali-
(See Work-Related Expense Test, later.)as a household employer. fying person.
Page 208 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 211 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying child who is your qualifying person and is under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you have only one qualifying child and
exclude or deduct at least $3,000 of dependent
care benefits?
You CAN claim the child and dependent
care credit. Fill out Form 2441 or
Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2004, except that you did not pay them until 2005, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2005.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 209

Page 212 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dependent defined. A dependent is a per- child, see Children of divorced or separated par-School. The term “school” includes elemen-
son, other than you or your spouse, for whoments in chapter 3. tary schools, junior and senior high schools,
you can claim an exemption. To be your depen- colleges, universities, and technical, trade, and
dent, a person must be your qualifying child (or mechanical schools. A school does not include
Earned Income Testyour qualifying relative). an on-the-job training course, correspondence
school, or Internet school.To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if youQualifying child.To be your qualifying
are married) must have earned income duringchild, a child must live with you for more than
the year. Work-Relatedhalf the year and meet other requirements.
Expense TestMore information. For more information Earned income. Earned income includes
about who is a dependent or a qualifying child,wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employeeChild and dependent care expenses must besee chapter 3. compensation, and net earnings from self-em-work-related to qualify for the credit. Expensesployment. A net loss from self-employmentPhysically or mentally not able to care for are considered work-related only if both of thereduces earned income. Earned income alsooneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, or following are true.includes strike benefits and any disability payfeed themselves because of physical or mentalyou report as wages. • They allow you (and your spouse if youproblems are considered not able to care for are married) to work or look for work.Earned income also includes nontaxablethemselves. Also, persons who must have con-employee compensation such as parsonage al-stant attention to prevent them from injuring • They are for a qualifying person’s care.lowances, meals and lodging furnished for thethemselves or others are considered not able toconvenience of the employer, voluntary salarycare for themselves. deferrals, military basic quarters and subsis-Working or Looking for Work
Person qualifying for part of year.You de- tence allowances and in-kind quarters and sub-
To be work-related, your expenses must allowtermine a person’s qualifying status each day.sistence, and military pay earned in a combat
you to work or look for work. If you are married,For example, if the person for whom you payzone.
generally both you and your spouse must workchild and dependent care expenses no longerMembers of certain religious faiths op-or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-qualifies on September 16, count only thoseposed to social security.Certain income ing during any month he or she is a full-timeexpenses through September 15. Also see Dol- earned by persons who are members of certainstudent or is physically or mentally not able tolar Limit under How To Figure the Credit, later. religious faiths that are opposed to participationcare for himself or herself.in Social Security Act programs and have anTaxpayer identification number.You must Your work can be for others or in your ownIRS-approved form that exempts certain incomeinclude on your return the name and taxpayer business or partnership. It can be either full timefrom social security and Medicare taxes may notidentification number (generally the social se- or part time.be considered earned income for this purpose.curity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the Work also includes actively looking for work.See Earned Income Test in Publication 503.correct information is not shown, the credit may However, if you do not find a job and have no
be reduced or disallowed. earned income for the year, you cannot take thisNot earned income. Earned income does notcredit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.Individual taxpayer identification numberinclude pensions or annuities, social securityWhether your expenses allow you to work or(ITIN) for aliens.If your qualifying person is apayments, workers’ compensation, interest, div-look for work depends on the facts. For example,nonresident or resident alien who does not haveidends, or unemployment compensation. It alsothe cost of a sitter while you and your spouse goand cannot get a social security number (SSN),does not include scholarship or fellowshipout to eat is not normally a work-related ex-use that person’s ITIN. To apply for an ITIN, seegrants, except amounts paid to you (and re-pense.Form W-7. The ITIN is entered wherever anported on Form W-2) for teaching, research, orAn expense is not considered work-relatedSSN is requested on a tax return. other services. merely because you had it while you were work-An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle
ing. The purpose of the expense must be tothe holder to social security benefits or changeRule for student-spouse or spouse not ableenable you to work.the holder’s employment or immigration statusto care for self.Your spouse is treated as
under U.S. law. having earned income for any month that he orVolunteer work.  For this purpose, you are
she is: not considered to be working if you do unpaidAdoption taxpayer identification number
volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominal(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who1. A full-time student, or salary.was placed in your home for adoption and for
whom you do not have an SSN, you must get an 2. Physically or mentally not able to care forWork for part of year.If you work or activelyATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application himself or herself. (Your spouse also mustlook for work during only part of the period cov-for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending live with you for more than half the year.)ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourU.S. Adoptions. Figure the earned income of the nonworkingexpenses for each day. For example, if you work
spouse described under (1) or (2) above asall year and pay care expenses of $250 a monthChild of divorced or separated parents.
explained under Earned Income Limit, later. ($3,000 for the year), all the expenses areEven if you cannot claim your child as a depen-
This rule applies to only one spouse for anywork-related. However, if you work or look fordent, he or she is treated as your qualifying
one month. If, in the same month, both you andwork for only 2 months and 15 days during theperson if:
your spouse do not work and are either full-timeyear and pay expenses of $250 a month, your• The child was under age 13 or was physi-students or physically or mentally not able towork-related expenses are limited to $625 (21/2
cally or mentally not able to care for him-care for yourselves, only one of you can bemonths × $250).self or herself, treated as having earned income in that month.
Payments while you are out sick.Do not• You were the child’s custodial parent (theFull-time student.You are a full-time stu-count as work-related expenses amounts youparent with whom the child lived for thedent if you are enrolled at and attend a school forpay for child and dependent care while you aregreater part of 2005), and the number of hours or classes that the schooloff work because of illness. These amounts are
considers full time. You must have been a stu-• The noncustodial parent is entitled to not paid to allow you to work. This applies even if
dent for some part of each of 5 calendar monthsclaim the child as a dependent under the you get sick pay and are still considered an
during the year. (The months need not be con-special rules for a child of divorced or sep- employee.
secutive.)arated parents.
If you enrolled in school before August 25,In that case, the noncustodial parent cannot2005, you are treated as a full-time student forCare of a Qualifying Persontreat the child as a qualifying person. any month of the enrollment period you were
To find out when a noncustodial parent is unable to attend classes because of Hurricane To be work-related, your expenses must be to
entitled to claim the dependency exemption for a Katrina. provide care for a qualifying person. You do not
Page 210 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 213 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have to choose the least expensive way of pro- pense test if they are at least partly for the cal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans-
viding the care. well-being and protection of a qualifying person. portation, or mortgage principal.
Expenses are for the care of a qualifying Household services are ordinary and usualThey also do not include the purchase, per-
person only if their main purpose is the person’s services done in and around your home that aremanent improvement, or replacement of prop-
well-being and protection. necessary to run your home. They include the erty. For example, you cannot include the cost of
Expenses for household services qualify if services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-replacing a water heater. However, you can in-
part of the services is for the care of qualifying ever, they do not include the services of a chauf-clude the cost of repairing a water heater.
persons. See Household services, later. feur, bartender, or gardener. See Household
Services in Publication 503 for more informa-Death of spouse. If your spouse died during
Expenses not for care.Expenses for care dotion. the year and you do not remarry before the end
not include amounts you pay for food, clothing,In this chapter, the term housekeeper refersof the year, you generally must file a joint return
education, and entertainment. However, youto any household employee whose services in-to take the credit. If you do remarry before the
can include small amounts paid for these items ifclude the care of a qualifying person. end of the year, the credit can be claimed on
they are incident to and cannot be separated your deceased spouse’s separate return.Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you payfrom the cost of caring for the qualifying person.on wages for qualifying child and dependent
care services are work-related expenses. SeeProviderEducation. Expenses for a child in nursery
Employment Taxes for Household Employers,school, pre-school, or similar programs for chil- Identification Testlater.dren below the level of kindergarten are ex-
penses for care. Expenses to attend You must identify all persons or organizations
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses that provide care for your child or dependent.
Payments to Relatives orfor care. Do not use these expenses to figure Use Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form
your credit. Dependents 1040A) to show the information.
You can count work-related payments you makeExample 1. You take your 3-year-old child Information needed.To identify the care pro-
to relatives who are not your dependents, even ifto a nursery school that provides lunch and vider, you must give the provider’s:
they live in your home. However, do not counteducational activities as a part of its preschool
any amounts you pay to: 1. Name,childcare service. You can count the total cost
when you figure the credit. 2. Address, and1. A dependent for whom you (or your
spouse if you are married) can claim an3. Taxpayer identification number.Example 2. You place your 10-year-old exemption,child in a boarding school so you can work full If the care provider is an individual, the tax-time. Only the part of the boarding school ex-2. Your child who was under age 19 at thepayer identification number is his or her socialpense that is for the care of your child is aend of the year, even if he or she is notsecurity number or individual taxpayer identifi-work-related expense. You can count that partyour dependent, cation number. If the care provider is an organi-of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be zation, then it is the employer identification3. Your spouse, orseparated from the cost of education. You can- number (EIN).not count any part of the amount you pay the4. The parent of your qualifying child who isYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi-school for your child’s education. your qualifying person and is under fication number if the care provider is one ofage 13. certain tax-exempt organizations (such as aCare outside your home.You can count the
church or school). In this case, enter “Tax-Ex-cost of care provided outside your home if the
empt” in the space where the tax form calls forcare is for your dependent under age 13 or anyJoint Return Test the number.other qualifying person who regularly spends at
If you cannot provide all of the information orleast 8 hours each day in your home. Generally, married couples must file a joint re-
if the information you provide is incorrect youturn to take the credit. However, if you are legallyDependent care center. You can count must be able to show that you used due dili-separated or living apart from your spouse, youcare provided outside your home by a depen- gence (discussed later) in trying to furnish themay be able to file a separate return and stilldent care center only if the center complies with necessary information.take the credit.all state and local regulations that apply to these
centers. Legally separated.You are not considered Getting the information.You can use Form
A dependent care center is a place that pro-married if you are legally separated from yourW-10 to request the required information from
vides care for more than six persons (other thanspouse under a decree of divorce or separatethe care provider. If you do not use Form W-10,
persons who live there) and receives a fee,maintenance. You are eligible to take the credityou can get the information from:
payment, or grant for providing services for anyon a separate return.
of those persons, even if the center is not run for 1. A copy of the provider’s social security
Married and living apart.You are not consid-profit. card,
ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifCamp. The cost of sending your child to an 2. A copy of the provider’s driver’s license (inall the following apply.overnight camp is not considered a work-related a state where the license includes the so-
expense. The cost of sending your child to a day1. You file a separate return. cial security number),
camp may be a work-related expense, even if2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per- 3. A copy of the provider’s completed Formthe camp specializes in a particular activity,son for more than half the year. W-4 if he or she is your household em-such as computers or soccer. ployee,3. You pay more than half the cost of keeping
Transportation.The cost of getting a qualify-up your home for the year. 4. A copy of the statement furnished by your
ing person from your home to the care location employer if the provider is your employer’s4. Your spouse does not live in your home forand back, or from the care location to school and dependent care plan, orthe last 6 months of the year.back, is not considered a work-related expense.
5. A letter or invoice from the provider if itThis includes the costs of bus, subway, taxi, or
Costs of keeping up a home.The costs of shows the information.private car. Also, if you pay the transportation
keeping up a home normally include propertycost for the care provider to come to your home,
taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, You should keep this information withyou cannot count this cost as a work-related
home repairs, insurance on the home, and food your tax records. Do not send Formexpense.
eaten at home. W-10 (or other document containingRECORDS
Household services. Expenses you pay for The costs of keeping up a home do not this information) to the Internal Revenue Serv-
household services meet the work-related ex- include payments for clothing, education, medi- ice.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 211

Page 214 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Due diligence.If the care provider informationsocial services agency. You can use only 3. Your earned income,
you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit $1,000 to figure your credit. 4. Your spouse’s earned income, ormay not be allowed. However, if you can showMedical expenses. Some expenses for the 5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).that you used due diligence in trying to supplycare of qualifying persons who are not able tothe information, you can still claim the credit. The definition of earned income for this purposecare for themselves may qualify as work-relatedYou can show due diligence by getting and is not exactly the same as the definition for theexpenses and also as medical expenses. Youkeeping the provider’s completed Form W-10 or credit. See the instructions for Form 2441 orcan use them either way, but you cannot use theone of the other sources of information listed Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).same expenses to claim both a credit and aearlier. Care providers can be penalized if theymedical expense deduction. Statement for employee. Your employerdo not provide this information to you or if theyIf you use these expenses to figure the creditmust give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement)provide incorrect information. and they are more than the earned income limitshowing in box 10 the total amount of dependentProvider refusal.If the provider refuses toor the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addcare benefits provided to you during the yeargive you their identifying information, you shouldthe excess to your medical expenses. However,under a qualified plan. Your employer will alsoreport whatever information you have (such asif you use your total expenses to figure yourinclude any dependent care benefits overthe name and address) on the form you use tomedical expense deduction, you cannot use any$5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2claim the credit. Enter “See page 2” in the col-part of them to figure your credit. in box 10.umns calling for the information you do not have.Amounts excluded from your incomeOn the bottom of page 2, explain that you re- Effect of exclusion.If you exclude dependentunder your employer’s dependentquested the information from the care provider, care benefits from your income, the amount ofcare benefits plan cannot be used toCAUTION
!
but the provider did not give you the information. the excluded benefits:claim a medical expense deduction.This statement will show that you used due
1. Is not included in your work-related ex-diligence in trying to furnish the necessary infor-
penses, andmation. Dependent Care Benefits
2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.
If you receive dependent care benefits, your
dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be
Earned Income Limitreduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit, later. But,How To Figure
even if you cannot take the credit, you may be
The amount of work-related expenses you useable to take an exclusion or deduction for thethe Credit to figure your credit cannot be more than:dependent care benefits.
Your credit is a percentage of your work-related 1. Your earned income for the year if you areDependent care benefits. Dependent careexpenses. Your expenses are subject to the single at the end of the year, orbenefits include:earned income limit and the dollar limit. The
2. The smaller of your or your spouse’spercentage is based on your adjusted gross1. Amounts your employer pays directly to earned income for the year if you are mar-income. either you or your care provider for the ried at the end of the year.care of your qualifying person while you
work, and Earned income is defined under Earned IncomeFiguring Total
Test, earlier.2. The fair market value of care in a day-careWork-Related Expenses
facility provided or sponsored by your em- For purposes of item (2), use your
ployer.To figure the credit for 2005 work-related ex- spouse’s earned income for the entire
penses, count only those you paid by December year, even if you were married for only
TIP
Your salary may have been reduced to pay for31, 2005. part of the year.these benefits. If you received benefits, they
should be shown on your W-2 form. See State- Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa-Expenses prepaid in an earlier year.If you ment for employee, later. rated or married and living apart from yourpay for services before they are provided, youBenefits you received as a partner should bespouse (as described under Joint Return Test,can count the prepaid expenses only in the yearshown in box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Formearlier), you are not considered married for pur-the care is received. Claim the expenses for the1065) with code O. Enter the amount of theseposes of the earned income limit. Use only yourlater year as if they were actually paid in thatbenefits on Form 2441, line 12. income in figuring the earned income limit.later year.
Exclusion or deduction. If your employer Surviving spouse.If your spouse died during
Expenses not paid until the following year.provides dependent care benefits under a quali-the year and you file a joint return as a surviving
Do not count 2004 expenses that you paid infied plan, you may be able to exclude thesespouse, you are not considered married for pur-
2005 as work-related expenses for 2005. Youbenefits from your income. Your employer canposes of the earned income limit. Use only your
may be able to claim an additional credit fortell you whether your benefit plan qualifies.income in figuring the earned income limit.
them on your 2005 return, but you must figure itIf you are self-employed and receive benefits
Community property laws. You should dis-separately. See Payments for previous year’sfrom a qualified dependent care benefit plan,
regard community property laws when you fig-expenses under Amount of Credit in Publicationyou are treated as both employer and employee.
ure earned income for this credit.503. Therefore, you would not get an exclusion from
wages but instead a deduction on Schedule CStudent-spouse or spouse not able to careIf you had expenses in 2005 that you
(Form 1040), line 14; Schedule E (Form 1040),for self.Your spouse who is either a full-timedid not pay until 2006, you cannot
line 18; or Schedule F (Form 1040), line 17.student or not able to care for himself or herselfcount them when figuring your 2005
TIP
If your plan qualifies, you must complete Partis treated as having earned income. His or hercredit. You may be able to claim a credit for them
III of either Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Formearned income for each month is considered toon your 2006 return.
1040A) to claim the exclusion. You cannot usebe at least $250 if there is one qualifying person
Form 1040EZ. You must use Form 2441 to claimExpenses reimbursed. If a state social serv- in your home, or at least $500 if there are two or
the deduction.ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount to more.
The amount you can exclude or deduct isreimburse you for some of your child and depen- Spouse works. If your spouse works duringlimited to the smallest of:dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex- that month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) orpenses that are reimbursed as work-related1. The total amount of dependent care bene- his or her actual earned income for that month.expenses. fits you received during the year, Spouse qualifies for part of month. If
Example. You paid work-related expenses 2. The total amount of qualified expenses you your spouse is a full-time student or not able to
of $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a state incurred during the year, care for himself or herself for only part of a
Page 212 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 215 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
month, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for that are described earlier under Provider Identifica-Amount of Creditmonth. tion Test.
To determine the amount of your credit, multiplyBoth spouses qualify. If, in the same
your work-related expenses (after applying themonth, both you and your spouse are either
earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-full-time students or not able to care for your-
age. This percentage depends on your adjustedEmployment Taxesselves, only one spouse can be considered to
gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, orhave this earned income of $250 (or $500) for
Form 1040A, line 22. The following table showsfor Householdthat month.
the percentage to use based on adjusted gross
income. EmployersDollar Limit
IF your adjusted gross THEN If you pay someone to come to your home andincome is: theThere is a dollar limit on the amount of your care for your dependent or spouse, you may beBut not percentagework-related expenses you can use to figure the a household employer. If you are a householdOver over is:credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifying employer, you will need an employer identifica-person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifying$ 0 $15,000 35% tion number (EIN) and you may have to paypersons. 15,000 17,000 34% employment taxes. If the individuals who work in17,000 19,000 33%If you paid work-related expenses for your home are self-employed, you are not liable19,000 21,000 32%the care of two or more qualifying per- for any of the taxes discussed in this section.21,000 23,000 31%sons, the $6,000 limit does not need Self-employed persons who are in business for
TIP
23,000 25,000 30%to be divided equally among them. For example, themselves are not household employees. Usu-25,000 27,000 29%if your work-related expenses for the care of one ally, you are not a household employer if the27,000 29,000 28%qualifying person are $3,200 and your work-re- person who cares for your dependent or spouse29,000 31,000 27%lated expenses for another qualifying person are does so at his or her home or place of business.31,000 33,000 26%$2,800, you can use the total, $6,000, when If you use a placement agency that exercises33,000 35,000 25%
figuring the credit. control over what work is done and how it will be35,000 37,000 24%
done by a babysitter or companion who works in37,000 39,000 23%Yearly limit.The dollar limit is a yearly limit. your home, that person is not your employee.39,000 41,000 22%The amount of the dollar limit remains the same This control could include providing rules of con-41,000 43,000 21%no matter how long, during the year, you have a duct and appearance and requiring regular re-43,000 No limit 20%qualifying person in your household. Use the ports. In this case, you do not have to pay$3,000 limit if you paid work-related expenses employment taxes. But, if an agency merelyfor the care of one qualifying person at any time gives you a list of sitters and you hire one fromduring the year. Use $6,000 if you paid work-re- that list, the sitter may be your employee.lated expenses for the care of more than oneHow To Claim If you have a household employee you mayqualifying person at any time during the year. be subject to:
the Credit
1. Social security and Medicare taxes,
Reduced Dollar Limit To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or2. Federal unemployment tax, andForm 1040A. You cannot claim the credit onIf you received dependent care benefits that you 3. Federal income tax withholding.Form 1040EZ.exclude or deduct from your income, you must
Social security and Medicare taxes are gener-subtract that amount from the dollar limit thatForm 1040. You must complete Form 2441
ally withheld from the employee’s pay andapplies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig-and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy-ured on lines 28 through 32 of Form 2441 oron Form 1040, line 48. An example of a filled-in
ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlylines 22 through 26 of Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).Form 2441 is at the end of this chapter.
and provides for payments of unemploymentSee Dependent Care Benefits, earlier, for infor-Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2compensation to workers who have lost theirmation on excluding or deducting these benefits.(Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A.jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from theEnter the credit on your Form 1040A, line 29.employee’s total pay if the employee asks you toExample. George is a widower with one
do so and you agree.child and earns $24,000 a year. He pays Limit on credit.The amount of credit you can
For more information on a householdwork-related expenses of $2,900 for the care ofclaim is limited to the amount of your regular tax
employer’s tax responsibilities, see Publicationhis 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim the(after reduction by any allowable foreign tax
926 and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-credit for child and dependent care expenses.credit) plus your alternative minimum tax, if any.
tions.His employer pays an additional $1,000 under aTax credit not refundable.You cannot getdependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex- State employment tax.You may also have toa refund for any part of the credit that is morecluded from George’s income. pay state unemployment tax. Contact your statethan this limit.Although the dollar limit for his work-related unemployment tax office for information. Youexpenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person), Recordkeeping. You should keep should also find out whether you need to pay orGeorge figures his credit on only $2,000 of the records of your work-related ex- collect other state employment taxes or carry$2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is penses. Also, if your dependent orRECORDS
workers’ compensation insurance. A list of statebecause his dollar limit is reduced as shownspouse is not able to care for himself or herself,employment tax agencies, including addressesnext. your records should show both the nature andand phone numbers, is in Publication 926.the length of the disability. Other records you
George’s Reduced Dollar Limit should keep to support your claim for the credit
1) Maximum allowable expenses
for one qualifying person..... $3,000
2) Minus: Dependent care benefits
George excludes from income −1,000
3) Reduced dollar limit on
expenses George can use for
the credit............... $2,000
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 213

Page 216 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) Lesser of expenses paidemployer reports the value of this service as
($2,400) or dollar limit ($3,000) $2,400$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on herExample Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax-6) Percentage for AGI of $29,000able wages in box 1. (28%) .................  . 2 8The following example shows how to figure the
A neighbor cares for Joan’s older child (Seth)7) Multiply the amount on line 5 bycredit for child and dependent care expenses for
after school, on holidays, and during the sum-the percentage on line 6 ($2,400two children when employer-provided depen-
mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for this x .28)................. $  6 7 2dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in
8) Enter the amount from Formcare.Form 2441 is shown at the end of this chapter.
1040, line 46............ $1,296Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 asIllustrated example.Joan Thomas is di- 9) Enter the amount from Formfollows.vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She 1040, line 47............ - 0 -
works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross 10) Subtract line 9 from line 8.... 1,2961) Work-related expenses Joan
income (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amount 11) Creditpaid .................. $2,400
(Enter the smaller of line 7 oris earned income. 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualified
line 10)................ $672Joan’s younger child (Susan) stays at her individuals).............. $6,000
employer’s on-site childcare center while she3) Minus: Dependent care benefits
works. The benefits from this childcare centerexcluded from Joan’s income −3,000
4) Reduced dollar limit........ $3,000qualify to be excluded from her income. Her
Page 214 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 217 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
672
Seth
Susan
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
1,296
29,000
672
28
Thomas
Thomas
OMB No. 1545-0074Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care— You must complete this part. 
(If you need more space, use the bottom of page 2.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount from
line 32
Enter your earned income. See instructions
3
3
If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 387
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.27$29,000—31,000.35$0—15,000
.2631,000—33,000.3415,000—17,000
.2533,000—35,000.3317,000—19,000
.2435,000—37,000.3219,000—21,000
.2337,000—39,000.3121,000—23,000
.3023,000—25,000
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2004 expenses in 2005, see
the instructions
9
Form 2441 (2005)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 62.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2005 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses
9
25,000—27,000
27,000—29,000
.29
.28
39,000—41,000
41,000—43,000
43,000—No limit
.22
.21
.20
10
11
10
11
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46, minus any amount on Form 1040, line 47
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 10
here and on Form 1040, line 48
2005
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 215

Page 218 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,000
3,000
-0-
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
-0-
3,000
-0-
3,000
2,400
2,400
3,000
3,000
-0-
3,000
6,000
Page 2Form 2441 (2005)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received in 2005. Amounts you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form(s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a partner,
include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from your sole
proprietorship or partnership
Enter the amount forfeited or carried forward to 2006, if any (see the instructions)
Subtract line 13 from line 12
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2005 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
13
15
16Enter the smaller of line 14 or 15
14
Enter your earned income. See instructions
15
17
Enter the amount shown below that applies
to you.
18
Enter the smallest of line 16, 17, or 18
16
19
Enter the amount from line 12 that you received from your sole proprietorship or
partnership. If you did not receive any such amounts, enter -0-
17
20
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 26 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-. Also, include
this amount on Form 1040, line 7. On the dotted line next to line 7, enter “DCB”
18
27
Part III
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 28–32 below.
28
29
30
19
20
27
28 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 29 from line 28. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit.
Exception. If you paid 2004 expenses in 2005, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 30 or 31. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4–11
Add lines 23 and 26
32
29
30
32
13
14
12
12
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown on
line 29 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
31
31
Form 2441 (2005)
● If married filing jointly, enter your
spouse’s earned income (if your spouse
was a student or was disabled, see the
instructions for line 5).
● If married filing separately, see the
instructions for the amount to enter.
● All others, enter the amount from line 17.
/H20854
Subtract line 20 from line 1421
Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and you were required to enter your
spouse’s earned income on line 18)
22
Deductible benefits. Enter the smallest of line 19, 20, or 22. Also, include this amount
on the appropriate line(s) of your return (see the instructions)
23
Enter the smaller of line 19 or 2224
Enter the amount from line 2325
Excluded benefits. Subtract line 25 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0-26
24
25
21
22
23
26
Page 216 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 219 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can take the credit only if you fileUnder Age 65
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can-
If you are under age 65 at the end of 2005, younot take the credit if you file Form
TIP
33. can qualify for the credit only if you are retired on1040EZ.
permanent and total disability. You are retired
on permanent and total disability if:Qualified Individual
• You were permanently and totally disabledCredit for the You are a qualified individual for this credit if youwhen you retired, and
are a U.S. citizen or resident and either of the• You retired on disability before the close offollowing applies.Elderly or the the tax year.
1. You were age 65 or older at the end of Even if you do not retire formally, you areDisabled 2005. considered retired on disability when you have
2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2005stopped working because of your disability.
and all three of the following statementsIf you retired on disability before 1977, and
were not permanently and totally disabled at theare true.Introduction
time, you can qualify for the credit if you wereIf you qualify, the law provides a number ofa. You retired on permanent and total dis-permanently and totally disabled on January 1,credits that can reduce the tax you owe for a ability (explained later). 1976, or January 1, 1977.year. One of these credits is the credit for theb. You received taxable disability income You are considered to be under ageelderly or the disabled. for 2005. 65 at the end of 2005 if you were bornThis chapter explains: after January 1, 1941.
TIP
c. On January 1, 2005, you had not• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderlyreached mandatory retirement age (de-Permanent and total disability.You are per-or the disabled, and fined later under Disability income). manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-• How to figure this credit. gage in any substantial gainful activity because
of your physical or mental condition. A physician You may be able to take this credit if you are:Age 65. You are considered to be age 65 onmust certify that the condition has lasted or canthe day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, ifbe expected to last continuously for 12 months• Age 65 or older, or you were born on January 1, 1941, you areor more, or that the condition can be expected to
considered to be age 65 at the end of 2005.• Retired on permanent and total disability. result in death. See Physician’s statement, later.
Substantial gainful activity.Substantial
gainful activity is the performance of significantUseful Items U.S. Citizen or Resident
duties over a reasonable period of time whileYou may want to see:
working for pay or profit, or in work generallyYou must be a U.S. citizen or resident (or be
done for pay or profit. Full-time work (ortreated as a resident) to take the credit. Gener-Publication
part-time work done at your employer’s conve-ally, you cannot take the credit if you were a
❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the nience) in a competitive work situation for atnonresident alien at any time during the tax year.
least the minimum wage conclusively showsDisabled
that you are able to engage in substantial gainfulExceptions. You may be able to take the❏ 554 Older Americans’ Tax Guide activity.credit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax Substantial gainful activity is not work you doried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of theto take care of yourself or your home. It is nottax year and you and your spouse choose toForms (and Instructions) unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy ortreat you as a U.S. resident. If you make thattraining, school attendance, clubs, social pro-choice, both you and your spouse are taxed on❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A)Credit for the grams, and similar activities. However, doingyour worldwide income.Elderly or the Disabled for Form this kind of work may show that you are able toIf you were a nonresident alien at the begin-1040A Filers engage in substantial gainful activity.
ning of the year and a resident at the end of theThe fact that you have not worked for some❏ Schedule R (Form 1040)Credit for the year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen ortime is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youElderly or the Disabled resident at the end of the year, you may be ablecannot engage in substantial gainful activity.
to choose to be treated as a U.S. resident for the
Sheltered employment. Certain work of-entire year. In that case, you may be allowed to
fered at qualified locations to physically or men-take the credit. For information on thesetally impaired persons is considered shelteredchoices, see chapter 1 of Publication 519, U.S.employment. These qualified locations are inCan You Take Tax Guide for Aliens. sheltered workshops, hospitals and similar insti-
tutions, homebound programs, and Departmentthe Credit? of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsored homes.Married Persons Compared to commercial employment, payYou can take the credit for the elderly or the is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,Generally, if you are married at the end of the taxdisabled if you meet both of the following re- one usually does not look for sheltered employ-year, you and your spouse must file a joint returnquirements. ment if he or she can get other employment. Theto take the credit. However, if you and your
fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-• You are a qualified individual. spouse did not live in the same household at anyment is not proof of that person’s ability to en-time during the tax year, you can file either joint• Your income is not more than certain lim- gage in substantial gainful activity.or separate returns and still take the credit.its.
Physician’s statement.If you are under ageYou can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B asHead of household. You can file as head of65, you must have your physician complete aguides to see if you qualify. household and qualify to take the credit even ifstatement certifying that you were permanently
your spouse lived with you during the first 6Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a quali- and totally disabled on the date you retired. You
months of the year, if you meet all the tests. Seefied individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to can use the statement in the instructions for
Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests youmake sure your income is not too high to take Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form
must meet.the credit. 1040A).
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 217

Page 220 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 33-1. Initial Amounts
Figuring the Credit
THEN enter on line 10
of Schedule R (Form You can figure the credit yourself (see the expla-
nation that follows) or the IRS will figure it for1040) or Schedule 3
you. See Credit Figured for You, later.IF your filing status is ... (Form 1040A)...
Figuring the credit yourself.If you figure theSingle, head of household, or qualifying
credit yourself, fill out the front of either Sched-widow(er) with dependent child and, by the end
ule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or Schedule 3of 2005, you were (if you are filing Form 1040A). Next, fill out Part• 65 or older............................... $5,000 III of either Schedule R or Schedule 3.• under 65 and retired on permanent and total $5,000disability1 .................................
Married filing a joint return and by the end of
2005 There are four steps in Part III to determine the
amount of your credit:• both of you were 65 or older.................. $7,500
• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on 1. Determine your initial amount (lines$5,000permanent and total disability1 .................. 10–12).
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on 2. Total any nontaxable social security$7,500permanent and total disability2 .................. and certain other nontaxable pensions
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under and disability benefits you received$7,500 (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).65 and retired on permanent and total disability3 .....
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under 3. Determine your excess adjusted$5,000 gross income (lines 14–17).65 and not retired on permanent and total disability . . .
4. Determine your credit (lines 18–24 ofMarried filing a separate return and you did not Schedule R or lines 18–22 of Sched-live with your spouse at any time during the year ule 3).and, by the end of 2005, you were
These steps are discussed in more detail next.• 65 or older............................... $3,750
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total $3,750disability1 .................................
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income. Step 1. Determine Initial2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.Amount
To figure the credit, you must first determineYou do not have to file this statement with• It must be included in your income as
your initial amount. See Table 33-1.wages (or payments instead of wages) foryour Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must
the time you are absent from work be-keep it for your records. Initial amounts for persons under age 65.If
cause of permanent and total disability.you are a qualified individual under age 65, yourVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af-
initial amount cannot be more than your taxablefairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently andPayments that are not disability income.disability income.totally disabled, you can substitute VA FormAny payment you receive from a plan that does21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Totalnot provide for disability retirement is not disabil-Disability, for the physician’s statement you are Step 2. Total Certainity income. Any lump-sum payment for accruedrequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must beannual leave that you receive when you retire onNontaxable Pensions andsigned by a person authorized by the VA to dodisability is a salary payment and is not disabilityso. You can get this form from your local VA Benefitsincome.regional office. For purposes of the credit for the elderly orStep 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxablePhysician’s statement obtained in earlierthe disabled, disability income does not includesocial security and certain other nontaxable pay-year. If you got a physician’s statement in anamounts you receive after you reach mandatoryments you received during the year. (See Non-earlier year and, due to your continued disabledretirement age. Mandatory retirement age is thetaxable payments, later.)condition, you were unable to engage in anyage set by your employer at which you wouldEnter these nontaxable payments on linessubstantial gainful activity during 2005, you mayhave had to retire, had you not become dis-13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you arenot need to get another physician’s statementabled. married filing a joint return, you must enter thefor 2005. For a detailed explanation of the condi- combined amount of nontaxable payments bothtions you must meet, see the instructions for you and your spouse receive.Income LimitsPart II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3
Worksheets are provided in the Form(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi-To determine if you can claim the credit, you 1040 and Form 1040A instructions totions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched-must consider two income limits. The first limit ishelp you determine if any part of yourule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A).
TIP
the amount of your adjusted gross income social security benefits (or equivalent railroadIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of either(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-retirement benefits) is taxable.Schedule R or Schedule 3, enter in the spaceable social security and other nontaxable pen-
above the box on line 2 in Part II the first name(s)sions you received. The limits are shown inNontaxable payments. Include the following
of the spouse(s) for whom the box is checked.Figure 33-B, later. nontaxable payments in the amounts you enter
If both your AGI and nontaxable pensions on lines 13a and 13b.
Disability income.If you are under age 65,are less than the income limits, you may be able• Nontaxable social security payments. Thisyou can qualify for the credit only if you haveto claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit, next. is the nontaxable part of the amount oftaxable disability income. Disability income must
If either your AGI or your nontaxablebenefits shown in box 5 of Form SSA-1099,meet both of the following requirements.
pensions are equal to or more than which includes disability benefits, before
• It must be paid under your employer’s ac- the income limits, you cannot take thededucting any amounts withheld to payCAUTION
!
cident or health plan or pension plan.credit. premiums on supplementary Medicare in-
Page 218 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 221 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident? 1
Yes
Yes
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you 65 or older at the end of the
year?
No
/H17074
Are you retired on permanent and total
disability?
Yes
/H17074
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year? 2
No
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be
able to take the credit
for the elderly or the
disabled unless your
income exceeds the
limits in Figure 33-B.
/H17076
/H17074
Yes
/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
No
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of th e tax year, see U.S. Citizen or Resident
under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident, answer “yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return and
you did not live with your spouse
at any time during the year
$12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 219

Page 222 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
surance, and before any reduction becauseStep 4. Determine Your Credit Figured for Youof receipt of a benefit under workers’ com-
Creditpensation. If you choose to have the Internal Revenue Do not include a lump-sum death benefit Service (IRS) figure the credit for you, read theTo determine if you can take the credit, you mustpayment you may receive as a surviving following discussion for the form you will fileadd the amounts you figured in Step 2 and Stepspouse, or a surviving child’s insurance (Form 1040 or 1040A). If you want the IRS to3.benefit payments you may receive as a
figure your tax, see chapter 30.guardian.
IF the total of Steps THEN ...
• Social security equivalent part of tier 1 rail-2 and 3 is ...
road retirement pension payments that is Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure your
equal to or more you cannot take thenot taxed. This is the nontaxable part of credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under Taxthan the amount in credit.the amount of benefits shown in box 5 of Figured by IRS in chapter 30.Step 1Form RRB-1099.
less than the you can take the• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments or Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure youramount in Step 1 credit.disability benefits that are paid under a law credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Taxadministered by the Department of Veter- Figured by IRS in chapter 30.ans Affairs (VA). Figuring the credit.If you can take the credit,
 Do not include amounts received as asubtract the total of Step 2 and Step 3 from the
pension, annuity, or similar allowance for Exampleamount in Step 1 and multiply the result by 15%.
personal injuries or sickness resulting fromIn certain cases, the amount of your credit
The following example illustrates the credit foractive service in the armed forces of anymay be limited. See Limit on credit, later.
country or in the National Oceanic and At- the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount is
mospheric Administration, or the Public taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.Example. You are 66 years old and your
Health Service, or as a disability annuityspouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. You
under section 808 of the Foreign Service Example. James Davis is 58 years old, sin-file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjusted
Act of 1980. gle, and files Form 1040A. In 1998 he retired ongross income is $14,630. Together you received
$3,200 from social security, which was nontax-permanent and total disability, and he is still• Pension or annuity payments or disability
able. You figure the credit as follows: permanently and totally disabled. He got thebenefits that are excluded from income
under any provision of federal law other required physician’s statement in 1998, and kept1) Initial amount................ $5,000than the Internal Revenue Code. it with his records. His physician signed on line B2) Subtract from line 1 the total Do not include amounts that are a return of the statement. This year James checks theof:of your cost of a pension or annuity. These box in Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need toa) Nontaxable social securityamounts do not reduce your initial amount. get another statement for 2005.and other nontaxable
pensions.............. $3,200 He received the following income for theb) Excess adjusted grossYou should be sure to take into ac- year:incomecount all of the nontaxable amounts
[($14,630 − $10,000) ÷ 2] . . . 2,315 5,515Nontaxable social security........ $1,500you receive. These amounts are veri-CAUTION
!
3) Balance (Not less than -0-)....... - 0 - Interest (taxable).............. 1 0 0fied by the IRS through information supplied by
4) Credit..................... - 0 - Taxable disability pension........ 11,400other government agencies.
You cannot take the credit because your James’ adjusted gross income is $11,500nontaxable social security (line 2a) plus yourStep 3. Determine Excess ($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onexcess adjusted gross income (line 2b) is more
Adjusted Gross Income Schedule 3 as follows:than your amount on line 1.
1) Initial amount............. $5,000
Limit on credit.The amount of credit you canYou also must reduce your initial amount by your 2) Taxable disability pension.... 11,400
claim may be limited.excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- 3) Smaller of (1) or (2)......... 5,000
Figure any limit on your credit on linescess adjusted gross income on lines 14–17. 4) Subtract from line 3 the
21–24 of Schedule R or lines 21–22 of Sched-total of:You figure your excess adjusted gross in-
ule 3. a) Nontaxable disabilitycome as follows:
benefits (social security) $1,500
1. Subtract from your adjusted gross income b) Excess adjusted gross
(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, line income
22) the amount shown for your filing status [($11,500 − $7,500) ÷ 2] . . 2,000 3,500
5) Balance (Not less than -0-).... 1,500in the following list:
6) Multiply line 5 by 15% (.15) . . . 225
a. $7,500 if you are single, a head of 7) Enter the amount from
household, or a qualifying widow(er) Form 1040A, line 28..... 3 3 3
with a dependent child, 8) Enter any amounts from
Form 1040A, line 29..... - 0 -b. $10,000 if you are married filing a joint 9) Subtract line 8 from line 7 333return, or 10) Credit
(Enter the smaller of line 6c. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa-
or line 9)............ $225rate return and you and your spouse did
not live in the same household at any
His credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 30time during the tax year.
of Form 1040A. The Schedule 3 for James Davis
is not shown.2. Divide the result of (1) by 2.
Page 220 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 223 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8901 Information on Qualifying Children
Who Are Not Dependents Amount of Credit
❏ W-4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance34.
Certificate The maximum amount you can claim for the
credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child.
Child Tax Credit Limits on the Credit
Qualifying Child You must reduce your child tax credit if either (1)
or (2) applies.
What’s New A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax
credit is a child who: 1. The amount on Form 1040, line 46 or
Form 1040A, line 28 is less than the credit.Qualifying child.The definition of a qualifying
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, fosterIf this amount is zero, you cannot take thischild has changed. See Qualifying Child.
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- credit because there is no tax to reduce.
New Form 8901. If you have a qualifying child But you may be able to take the additionalter, or a descendant of any of them (for
who is not your dependent, you must complete child tax credit. See Additional Child Taxexample, your grandchild),
and file Form 8901, Information on Qualifying Credit, later.2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2005,Children Who Are Not Dependents.
2. Your modified adjusted gross income3. Did not provide over half of his or her ownKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005. (AGI) is above the amount shown belowsupport for 2005,This Act provides tax relief for persons affected for your filing status.
by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, if your 20054. Lived with you for more than half of 2005a. Married filing jointly - $110,000.earned income is less than your 2004 earned (see Exception to “time lived with you” con-
income, you may be able to use your 2004 dition below), and b. Single, head of household, or qualifying
earned income in figuring your additional child widow(er) - $75,000.5. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or atax credit for 2005. See Publication 4492.
resident of the United States. If the child c. Married filing separately - $55,000.
was adopted, see Adopted child below.
For each qualifying child you must eitherModified AGI. For purposes of the child taxcheck the box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Introduction credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus theline 6c, column (4), or complete Form 8901 (iffollowing amounts that may apply to you.The child tax credit is a credit that may reducethe child is not your dependent).
your tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your • Any amount excluded from income be-qualifying children. Example. Your son turned 17 on December cause of the exclusion of income from
The additional child tax credit is a credit you30, 2005. He is a citizen of the United States andPuerto Rico.
may be able to take if you are not able to claimyou claimed him as a dependent on your return.• Any amount on line 43 or line 48 of Formthe full amount of the child tax credit. He is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit2555, Foreign Earned Income.This chapter explains: because he was not under age 17 at the end of
• Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,2005.• Who is a qualifying child. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
• How much is the credit. • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-Exceptions to “time lived with you” condi-
clusion of Income for Bona Fide Residents• How to claim the credit. tion. A child is considered to have lived with
of American Samoa.you for all of 2005 if the child was born or died in• Why you should check your tax withhold-
2005 and your home was this child’s home foring. If you do not have any of the above, yourthe entire time he or she was alive. Temporary
modified AGI is the same as your AGI.absences for special circumstances, such as for
The child tax credit and the additionalschool, vacation, medical care, military service,AGI. Your AGI is the amount on Form 1040,child tax credit should not be con-or business, count as time lived at home.line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22.fused with the child and dependentCAUTION
!
There are also exceptions to the “time livedcare credit discussed in chapter 32.
with you” condition for kidnapped children and
children of divorced or separated parents. ForIf you have no tax.Credits, such as the child
details, see Residency Test, in chapter 3.tax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for Claiming the Credit
child and dependent care expenses, are used to
reduce tax. If your tax on Form 1040, line 46, or To claim the child tax credit, you must file FormQualifying child of more than one person.A
Form 1040A, line 28, is zero, do not figure the 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the childspecial rule applies if your qualifying child is the
child tax credit because there is no tax to re- tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must providequalifying child of more than one person. For
duce. However, you may qualify for the addi- the name and identification number (usually adetails, see Special Test for Qualifying Child of
tional child tax credit on line 68 (Form 1040) or social security number) on your tax return (orMore Than One Person, in chapter 3.line 42 (Form 1040A). Form 8901) for each qualifying child.
Answer the Questions in your form instruc-Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaystions for Form 1040, line 52 or Form 1040A, lineUseful Items treated as your own child. An adopted child33 to find out which child tax credit worksheetYou may want to see: includes a child lawfully placed with you for legalyou can use to figure the credit.
adoption. If you answer “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 inPublication
If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national andyour Form 1040 instructions or question 1 or 2 in❏ 972 Child Tax Credit your adopted child lived with you as a member ofyour Form 1040A instructions, you must com-
your household all year, that child meets condi-plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-Form (and Instructions) tion (5) above to be a qualifying child for the childtion 972. Otherwise, you can use the Child Tax
tax credit.❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit Credit Worksheet in your Form 1040 or Form
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040A instructions. (See the filled-in example, Amy’s tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
later.) 1040, is $1,334. She claims a $225 credit forExample child and dependent care expenses on line 48.
She claims a $1,029 earned income credit onAmy Brown files as head of household and hasline 66a. She has no other credits.two dependent children under age 17. The chil-After answering the Questions in the FormAdditional Child Tax dren are qualifying children for purposes of the1040 instructions for line 52, she completes thechild tax credit. Amy’s only income is her salarychild tax credit worksheet to figure her child taxCredit of $30,350. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-credit of $1,109. Amy’s completed questions
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown onand child tax credit worksheet are shown later.This credit is for certain individuals who get lessline 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,350. This is herAmy reads the TIP in the worksheet andthan the full amount of the child tax credit. Thetaxable earned income. finds that she may be able to take the additionaladditional child tax credit may give you a refundAmy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, orchild tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Crediteven if you do not owe any tax. 4563. She does not exclude income from Puertoand Amy’s completed Form 8812, later.
How to claim the additional child tax credit.Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,350.
To claim the additional child tax credit, follow the
steps below.
1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,
of your child tax credit. See Claiming the
Credit, earlier.
2. If you answered “Yes” on line 4 or line 5 of
the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions, or
line 13 of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet
in Publication 972, use Form 8812 to see if
you can take the additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to Form
1040, line 68 or Form 1040A, line 42.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
/H12011
3. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
2. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Adoption credit, Form 8839 (see the instructions for
Form 1040, line 53, on page 43).
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396 (see the instructions
for Form 1040, line 54, on page 43).
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit,
Form 8859.
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 42 to figure
your credit.
Yes. Y ou must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. Y ou will
also need the form(s)
listed above for any
credit(s) you are claiming.
/H12011
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP/H12011
Page 222 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 225 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2
2,000
1,334
1,109
225
1,109
225
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
/H12011
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 52
1040
Yes. STOP
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be under age 17 at the end
of 2005 and meet the other requirements listed on page 19.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 41. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
/H11003
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .TIP
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.TIP
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 52.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 68, if you answered “Yes” on line 4 or
line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 67.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
3. Add the amounts from Form 1040:
3
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
CAUTION
Line 47
Line 48 +
Line 49 +
Line 50 +
Line 51 +
Enter the total.
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 223

Page 226 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2,000
1,109
891
30,350
891
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
19,350
2,903
/H12011
/H12011
Yes. Subtract $11,000 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result
OMB No. 1545-0074
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2005)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4a
6
Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and
6. If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
27 and 59, plus any uncollected social security and
Medicare or tier 1 RRTA taxes included on line 63.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
66a and 67.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
41a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 43
(see instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet on page 42 of the Form 1040 instructions
or page 39 of the Form 1040A instructions. If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of the
worksheet on page 4 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 52, or Form 1040A, line 33
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H208541040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
1040
1040A. . . . . . . . . .
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 68, or
Form 1040A, line 42.
/H17076
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
3
Earned income (see instructions on back). If your main home was in the
Hurricane Katrina disaster area on August 25, 2005, and you are electing to
use your 2004 earned income, check here
/H17075
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $11,000?
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4a
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- 11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
(99)
4b
Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on
back)
b
2005
Page 224 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 227 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 35-1.Comparison of Education Credits
Hope Credit Lifetime Learning Credit
35. Up to $1,500 credit per eligible student Up to $2,000 credit per return
Available only until the first 2 years of Available for all years of postsecondary
postsecondary education are completed education and for courses to acquire or
improve job skillsEducation
Available only for 2 years per eligible student Available for an unlimited number of years
Credits Student must be pursuing an undergraduate Student does not need to be pursuing a degree
degree or other recognized educational or other recognized education credential
credential
What’s New Student must be enrolled at least half time for Available for one or more courses
at least one academic period beginning
during the yearKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
This Act provides tax relief for persons affectedNo felony drug conviction on student’s record Felony drug conviction rule does not applyby Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be
able to claim an education credit. See Publica-
tion 4492. can choose to take credits on a per-student,
Who Can Claim a Credit
per-year basis. This means that, for example,Income limits increased.Beginning in 2005,
Generally, you can claim an education credit ifyou can claim the Hope credit for one studentthe amount of your Hope or lifetime learning
all three of the following requirements are met.and the lifetime learning credit for another stu-credit is gradually reduced (phased out) if your
dent in the same year.modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is be- • You pay qualified education expenses oftween $43,000 and $53,000 ($87,000 and Differences between the Hope and lifetime higher education.$107,000 if you file a joint return). You cannotlearning credits.There are several differ-claim a credit if your MAGI is $53,000 or more • You pay the education expenses for anences between these two credits. For example,($107,000 or more if you file a joint return). This eligible student.you can claim the Hope credit based on theis an increase from the 2004 limits of $42,000same student’s expenses for no more than 2 • The eligible student is either yourself, yourand $52,000 ($85,000 and $105,000 if filing ayears. However, there is no limit on the numberspouse, or a dependent for whom youjoint return). For more information, see Effect of of years for which you can claim a lifetime learn-claim an exemption on your tax return.the Amount of Your Income on the Amount ofing credit based on the same student’s ex-Your Credit, later. penses. The differences between the two credits
are summarized in Table 35-1. Note. Qualified education expenses paid by
a dependent for whom you claim an exemption,You may be able to take a deduction
or by a third party for that dependent, are consid-for your education expenses insteadIntroduction ered paid by you.of a credit. Choose the one that will
TIP
give you the lower tax. See chapter 19 for detailsThis chapter discusses two tax credits (referred “Qualified education expenses” are defined
about the tuition and fees deduction.to here as education credits) available to per- below under What Expenses Qualify. “Eligible
sons who pay expenses for higher education. students” are defined later under Who Is an
They are: Eligible Student. A “dependent for whom youUseful Items
You may want to see: claim an exemption” is defined later under Who• The Hope credit, and
Can Claim a Dependent’s Expenses
• The lifetime learning credit. Publication You may find Figure 35-A, later in this chap-
ter, helpful in determining if you can claim anThe chapter will: ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
education credit on your tax return.• Give you general information that applies
Form (and Instructions)to both of the credits,
❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope and• Give you specific information about each Who Cannot Claim a CreditLifetime Learning Credits)of the credits,
You cannot claim an education credit for 2005 if• Help you choose which of the credits to any of the following apply.claim, and
• Your filing status is married filing sepa-• Show you how to figure the credit youInformation for Both rately.choose.
• You are listed as a dependent in the Ex-the Hope and Lifetime emptions section on another person’s taxCan you claim both education credits this
return (such as your parents’). See Whoyear. For each student, you can elect for anyLearning Credits Can Claim a Dependent’s Expenses, later.year only one of the credits. For example, if you
elect to take the Hope credit for a child on yourSeveral rules are common to both education • Your MAGI is $53,000 or more ($107,000
2005 tax return, you cannot, for that same child,credits. These are discussed below. or more in the case of a joint return).
also claim the lifetime learning credit for 2005. MAGI is explained later under Effect of the
If you are eligible to claim the Hope credit Amount of Your Income on the Amount ofCan You Claim a Creditand you are also eligible to claim the lifetime Your Credit.
learning credit for the same student in the sameThe following rules will help you determine if you• You (or your spouse) were a nonresidentyear, you can choose to claim either credit, butare eligible to claim an education credit on youralien for any part of 2005 and the nonresi-not both. For 2005, if the total qualified educa-tax return. dent alien did not elect to be treated as ation expenses for a student are less than $7,500,
resident alien for tax purposes. More infor-it will generally be to your benefit to claim the
mation on nonresident aliens can be foundHope credit.
in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forIf you pay qualified education expenses for
Aliens.more than one student in the same year, you
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 225

Page 228 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You claim a tuition and fees deduction forExample 1. Jackson is a sophomore in Uni- fied education expenses by the amount of any
the same student in 2005. versity V’s degree program in dentistry. This tax-free educational assistance and refund(s)
year, in addition to tuition, he is required to pay a you received.
fee to the university for the rental of the dentalTax-free educational assistance.This in-
What Expenses Qualify equipment he will use in this program. Becausecludes:the equipment rental fee must be paid to Univer-
The education credits are based on qualifiedsity V for enrollment and attendance, Jackson’s• Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow-
education expenses you pay for yourself, yourequipment rental fee is a qualified expense.ships (see chapter 12 of this publication
spouse, or a dependent for whom you claim an and chapter 1 of Publication 970),
exemption on your tax return. Generally, a creditExample 2. Donna and Charles, both • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationis allowed for qualified education expenses paidfirst-year students at College W, are required to970),in 2005 for an academic period beginning inhave certain books and other reading materials
2005 or in the first 3 months of 2006. to use in their mandatory first-year classes. The• Employer-provided educational assistance
For example, if you paid $1,500 in Decembercollege has no policy about how students should(see chapter 11 of Publication 970),
2005 for qualified tuition for the Spring 2006obtain these materials, but any student who• Veterans’ educational assistance (seesemester beginning in January 2006, you maypurchases them from College W’s bookstore willchapter 1 of Publication 970), andbe able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2005receive a bill directly from the college. Charles
credit. bought his books from a friend, so what he paid• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments
for them is not a qualified education expense.(other than gifts or inheritances) receivedAcademic period. An academic period in- Donna bought hers at College W’s bookstore. as educational assistance.cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherAlthough Donna paid College W directly for herperiod of study (such as a summer school ses-first-year books and materials, her payment ission) as reasonably determined by an educa- Refunds. Qualified education expenses donot a qualified expense because the books andtional institution. In the case of an educational not include expenses for which you, or someonematerials are not required to be purchased frominstitution that uses credit hours or clock hours else who paid qualified education expenses onCollege W for enrollment or attendance at theand does not have academic terms, each pay- behalf of a student, receive a refund. For moreinstitution.ment period can be treated as an academic information, see Refunds in chapters 2 and 3 of
period. Publication 970.Example 3. When Marci enrolled at College
X for her freshman year, she had to pay a sepa-Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-Paid with borrowed funds.You can claim an
rate student activity fee in addition to her tuition.tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu-education credit for qualified education ex-
This activity fee is required of all students, and iscation expenses by amounts paid with funds thepenses paid with the proceeds of a loan. You
used solely to fund on-campus organizationsstudent receives as:use the expenses to figure the education credit
and activities run by students, such as the stu-for the year in which the expenses are paid, not • Payment for services, such as wages,dent newspaper and the student government.the year in which the loan is repaid. Treat loan
No portion of the fee covers personal expenses.• A loan,payments sent directly to the educational institu-
Although labeled as a student activity fee, thetion as paid on the date the institution credits the • A gift,fee is required for Marci’s enrollment and attend-student’s account.
ance at College X. Therefore, it is a qualified• An inheritance, or
Student withdraws from class(es).You can expense. • A withdrawal from the student’s personalclaim an education credit for qualified education
savings.expenses not refunded when a student with-
draws. No Double Benefit Allowed Do not reduce the qualified education ex-
penses by any scholarship or fellowship re- You cannot do any of the following.
ported as income on the student’s tax return inQualified Education Expenses • Deduct higher education expenses on the following situations.
your income tax return (as, for example, aFor purposes of an education credit, qualified • The use of the money is restricted to costsbusiness expense) and also claim an edu-education expenses are tuition and certain re- of attendance (such as room and board)cation credit based on those same ex-lated expenses required for enrollment or at- other than qualified education expenses.penses.tendance at an eligible educational institution.
• The use of the money is not restricted and• Claim an education credit in the sameEligible educational institution.An eligible is used to pay education expenses thatyear that you are claiming a tuition andeducational institution is any college, university, are not qualified (such as room andfees deduction for the same student.vocational school, or other postsecondary edu- board).
cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-• Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learning
dent aid program administered by the credit based on the same qualified educa-Example 1. In 2005, Jackie paid $3,000 forDepartment of Education. It includes virtually alltion expenses. tuition and $5,000 for room and board at Univer-accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-• Claim an education credit based on thesity X. The university did not require her to payvately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-same expenses used to figure the tax-freeany fees in addition to her tuition in order tostitutions. The educational institution should beportion of a distribution from a Coverdellenroll in or attend classes. To help pay theseable to tell you if it is an eligible educationaleducation savings account (ESA) or quali-costs, she was awarded a $2,000 scholarshipinstitution. fied tuition program (QTP). and a $4,000 student loan.Certain educational institutions located
The terms of the scholarship state that it mayoutside the United States also participate in the• Claim a credit based on qualified educa-be used to pay any of Jackie’s college ex-U.S. Department of Education’s Federal Stu- tion expenses paid with tax-free scholar-penses. Because she applied it toward her tui-dent Aid (FSA) programs. ship, grant, or employer-provided tion, the scholarship is tax free. Therefore, foreducational assistance. See AdjustmentsRelated expenses. Student-activity fees and purposes of figuring an education credit (eitherto Qualified Education Expenses, next.expenses for course-related books, supplies, Hope or lifetime learning), she must first use the
and equipment are included in qualified educa- $2,000 scholarship to reduce her tuition (her
tion expenses only if the fees and expenses only qualified education expense). The student
Adjustments to Qualified
must be paid to the institution as a condition of loan is not tax-free educational assistance, soEducation Expenses
enrollment or attendance. she does not use it to reduce her qualified ex-
In the following examples, assume that each If you pay qualified education expenses with penses. Jackie is treated as having paid $1,000
student is an eligible student at an eligible edu- certain tax-free funds, you cannot claim a credit in qualified education expenses ($3,000 tuition
cational institution. for those amounts. You must reduce the quali- – $2,000 scholarship) in 2005.
Page 226 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 229 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2005?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2005 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2005 or the first 3 months of 2006?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
Were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien for any part of 2005 who
did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $53,000
($107,000 if married filing jointly)?
Did you claim a tuition and fees deduction for the same student?
Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
Do you have a tax liability (Form 1040, line 46 minus lines 47, 48, and 49)
(Form 1040A, line 28 minus lines 29 and 30)?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2005
You can claim
an education credit
for 2005
You cannot use the same expenses to claim both a lifetime learning credit and a Hope credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are c onsidered paid by you.*
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 227

Page 230 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Tuition reduction.When an eligible educa-IF you... THEN only...Example 1, except that Jackie uses the $2,000 tional institution provides a reduction in tuition to
scholarship to pay room and board, and, there- an employee of the institution (or spouse orclaim an exemption you can claim an
on your tax return education creditfore, reports her entire scholarship as income on dependent child of an employee), the amount of
for a dependent who based on thather tax return. In this case, the scholarship is the reduction may or may not be taxable. If it is
is an eligible student dependent’sallocated to expenses other than qualified edu- taxable, the employee is treated as receiving a
expenses. Thecation expenses. Jackie is treated as paying the payment of that amount and, in turn, paying it to
dependent cannotentire $3,000 tuition with other funds and can the educational institution on behalf of the stu-
claim a credit.figure her education credit on the entire $3,000. dent. For more information on tuition reductions,
see Qualified Tuition Reduction in chapter 1 ofdo not claim an the dependent can
Publication 970.exemption on your claim an education
Expenses That Do Not Qualify tax return for a credit. You cannot
dependent who is an claim a credit basedEffect of the Amount ofQualified education expenses do not includeeligible student on this dependent’s
amounts paid for: Your Income on the(even if entitled to expenses.
the exemption)• Insurance, Amount of Your Credit
• Medical expenses (including student The amount of your education credit is phasedExpenses paid by dependent. If you claimhealth fees), out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is betweenan exemption on your tax return for an eligible
$43,000 and $53,000 ($87,000 and $107,000 if• Room and board, student who is your dependent, treat any ex-
you file a joint return). You cannot claim anpenses paid (or deemed paid) by your depen-• Transportation, or education credit if your MAGI is $53,000 or moredent as if you had paid them. Include these
($107,000 or more if you file a joint return).• Similar personal, living, or family ex-expenses when figuring the amount of your edu-
penses. cation credit. Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).
This is true even if the amount must be paid to For most taxpayers, MAGI is adjusted grossQualified education expenses paid di-
the institution as a condition of enrollment or income (AGI) as figured on their federal incomerectly to an eligible educational insti-
attendance. tax return.tution for your dependent under a
TIP
court-approved divorce decree are treated asMAGI when using Form 1040A. If you fileSports, games, hobbies, and noncredit paid by your dependent. Form 1040A, your MAGI is the AGI on line 22 ofcourses. Qualified education expenses gen- that form.Expenses paid by you. If you claim an ex-erally do not include expenses that relate to any
emption for a dependent who is an eligible stu-course of instruction or other education that in- MAGI when using Form 1040. If you filedent, only you can include any expenses youvolves sports, games or hobbies, or any non- Form 1040, your MAGI is the AGI on line 38 ofpaid when figuring the amount of an educationcredit course. However, if the course of that form, modified by adding back any:credit. If neither you nor anyone else claims aninstruction or other education is part of the
exemption for the dependent, only the depen-1. Foreign earned income exclusion,student’s degree program, these expenses can
dent can include any expenses you paid whenqualify. 2. Foreign housing exclusion,figuring an education credit.
Comprehensive or bundled fees.Some eli- 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residentsExpenses paid by others. Someone othergible educational institutions combine all of their of American Samoa, andthan you, your spouse, or your dependent (suchfees for an academic period into one amount. If
as a relative or former spouse) may make a4. Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico.you do not receive or do not have access to an
payment directly to an eligible educational insti-allocation showing how much you paid for quali-
tution to pay for an eligible student’s qualifiedfied education expenses and how much you Phaseout. If your MAGI is within the range of
education expenses. In this case, the student ispaid for personal expenses, such as those listed incomes where the credit must be reduced, you
treated as receiving the payment from the otherabove, contact the institution. The institution is will figure your reduced credit using lines 7–13
person and, in turn, paying the institution. If yourequired to make this allocation and provide you of Form 8863.
claim an exemption on your tax return for thewith the amount you paid (or were billed) for
student, you are considered to have paid thequalified education expenses on Form 1098-T, When Must the Credit Beexpenses.Tuition Statement. See Figuring the Credit, later,
Repaid (Recaptured)for more information about Form 1098-T.
Example. In 2005, Ms. Allen makes a pay-
ment directly to an eligible educational institution If, after you file your 2005 tax return, you orWho Can Claim a for her grandson Todd’s qualified education ex- someone else receives tax-free educational as-
penses. For purposes of claiming an education sistance for, or a refund of, an expense you used
Dependent’s Expenses
credit, Todd is treated as receiving the money as to figure an education credit on that return, you
If there are qualified education expenses for a gift from his grandmother and, in turn, paying may have to repay all or part of the credit. You
your dependent for a year, either you or your his qualified education expenses himself. must refigure your education credit(s) for 2005
dependent, but not both of you, can claim an Unless an exemption for Todd is claimed on as if the assistance or refund was received in
education credit for your dependent’s expenses someone else’s return, only Todd can use the 2005. Subtract the amount of the refigured credit
for that year. payment to claim an education credit. from the amount of the credit you claimed. The
For you to claim an education credit for your If anyone, such as Todd’s parents, claims an result is the amount you must repay. You add
dependent’s expenses, you must also claim an exemption for Todd on his or her tax return, the repayment (recapture) to your tax liability for
exemption for your dependent. You do this by whoever claims the exemption may be able to the year in which you receive the assistance or
listing your dependent’s name and other re- use the expenses to claim an education credit. If refund (see the instructions for your tax return
quired information on Form 1040 (or Form anyone else claims an exemption for Todd, for that year). Your original 2005 tax return does
1040A), line 6c. Todd cannot claim an education credit. not change.
Page 228 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 231 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. After taking classes at College for each eligible student for whom you paid at
V on a half-time basis for the 2004 Spring and least $2,000 of qualified education expenses.Information for Only Fall semesters, Sharon became a full-time stu- However, the credit may be reduced based on
dent for the 2005 Spring semester. College V your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Your
the Hope Credit classified Sharon as a second-semester sopho-Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier.
more for the 2005 Spring semester and as aYou may be able to claim a Hope credit of up to Example. Jon and Karen Frost are marriedfirst-semester junior for the 2005 Fall semester.$1,500 for qualified education expenses paid for and file a joint tax return. For 2005, they claim anBecause College V did not classify Sharon aseach eligible student. exemption for their dependent daughter on theirhaving completed the first two years of postsec-
tax return. Their MAGI is $70,000. Their daugh-ondary education as of the beginning of 2005,
Who Is an Eligible Student ter is in her sophomore (second) year of studiesSharon is an eligible student for tax year 2005.
at the local university. Jon and Karen paid quali-Therefore, the qualified education expenses
To claim the Hope credit, the student for whom fied education expenses of $4,300 in 2005.paid for the 2005 Spring semester and the 2005
you pay qualified education expenses must be Jon and Karen, their daughter, and the localFall semester are taken into account in calculat-
an eligible student. This is a student who meets university meet all of the requirements for theing any Hope credit for 2005.
all of the following requirements. Hope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,500
Example 3. During the 2004 Fall semester, Hope credit in 2005. This is 100% of the first1. The student did not have expenses thatLuis was a high school student who took classes $1,000 of qualified education expenses, pluswere used to figure a Hope credit in any 2on a half-time basis at College X. Luis was not 50% of the next $1,000.earlier tax years. enrolled as part of a degree program at College
Form 1098-T. To help you figure your HopeX because College X only admits students to a2. The student had not completed the first 2 credit, you should receive Form 1098-T. Gener-degree program if they have a high school di-years of postsecondary education (gener- ally, an eligible educational institution (such as aploma or equivalent. Because Luis was not en-ally, the freshman and sophomore years of college or university) must send Form 1098-Trolled in a degree program at College X duringcollege) before 2005. (or acceptable substitute) to each enrolled stu-2004, Luis was not an eligible student for tax3. For at least one academic period begin- dent by January 31, 2006.year 2004.ning in 2005, the student was enrolled at
least half-time in a program leading to aExample 4. The facts are the same as inClaiming the Creditdegree, certificate, or other recognized ed-Example 3. During the 2005 Spring semester,ucational credential. Luis again attended College X but not as part ofYou claim the Hope credit by completing Parts I
a degree program. Luis graduated from highand III of Form 8863 and submitting it with your4. The student was free of any federal or
school in June 2005. For the 2005 Fall semes-Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit on Formstate felony conviction for possessing or
ter, Luis enrolled as a full-time student in College1040, line 50, or on Form 1040A, line 31. Andistributing a controlled substance as of
X as part of a degree program, and College Xillustrated example using Form 8863 appears atthe end of 2005.
awarded Luis credit for his prior coursework atthe end of this chapter.
College X. Because Luis was enrolled in a de-Completion of first 2 years.A student who gree program at College X for the 2005 Fall termwas awarded 2 years of academic credit foron at least a half-time basis, Luis is an eligiblepostsecondary work completed before 2005 hasstudent for all of tax year 2005. Therefore, theInformation for Onlycompleted the first 2 years of postsecondaryqualified education expenses paid for classeseducation. This student generally would not betaken at College X during both the 2005 Springthe Lifetime Learningan eligible student for purposes of the Hopesemester (during which Luis was not enrolled incredit. a degree program) and the 2005 Fall semesterCreditare taken into account in computing any HopeException. Any academic credit awarded
credit.solely on the basis of the student’s performance You may be able to claim a lifetime learningon proficiency examinations is disregarded in credit of up to $2,000 for qualified educationExample 5. Diana graduated from highdetermining whether the student has completed expenses paid for all students enrolled in eligibleschool in June 2003. In January 2004, Diana2 years of postsecondary education. educational institutions.enrolled in a one-year postsecondary certificate
Enrolled at least half-time.A student was program on a full-time basis to obtain a certifi-
Who Is an Eligible Studentenrolled at least half-time if the student wascate as a travel agent. Diana completed the
taking at least half the normal full-time work loadprogram in December 2004, and was awarded a
For purposes of the lifetime learning credit, anfor his or her course of study. certificate. In January 2005, she enrolled in a
eligible student is a student who is enrolled inone-year postsecondary certificate program onThe standard for what is half of the normal one or more courses at an eligible educationala full-time basis to obtain a certificate as a com-full-time work load is determined by each eligible institution.puter programmer. Diana is an eligible studenteducational institution. However, the standard
for both tax years 2004 and 2005 because shemay not be lower than any of those established
meets the degree requirement, the work loadby the Department of Education under the Figuring the Credit
requirement, and the year of study requirementHigher Education Act of 1965.
for those years. The amount of the lifetime learning credit is 20%
Example 1. Marty graduated from high of the first $10,000 of qualified education ex-
school in June 2004. In September, he enrolled penses you paid for all eligible students. TheFiguring the Creditin an undergraduate degree program at College maximum amount of lifetime learning credit you
U, and attended full time for both the 2004 Fall can claim for 2005 is $2,000 (20% × $10,000).The amount of the Hope credit (per eligible stu-
and 2005 Spring semesters. For the 2005 Fall However, that amount may be reduced baseddent) is the sum of:
semester, Marty was enrolled less than on your MAGI. See Effect of the Amount of Your
half-time. Because Marty was enrolled in an1. 100% of the first $1,000 of qualified educa-Income on the Amount of Your Credit, earlier.
undergraduate degree program on at least a tion expenses you paid for the eligible stu-
half-time basis for at least one academic period Example. Bruce and Toni are married anddent, and
that began during 2004 and at least one aca- file a joint tax return. For 2005, their MAGI is2. 50% of the next $1,000 of qualified educa-demic period that began during 2005, he is an $75,000. Toni is attending a local college (antion expenses you paid for that student.eligible student for tax years 2004 and 2005 eligible educational institution) to earn credits
(including the 2005 Fall semester when he en- The maximum amount of Hope credit you toward a degree in nursing. She already has a
rolled at College U on less than a half-time can claim in 2005 is $1,500 times the number of bachelor’s degree in history and wants to be-
basis). eligible students. You can claim the full $1,500 come a nurse. In August 2005, Toni paid $6,000
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 229

Page 232 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of qualified education expenses for her Fall Dave and Valerie, their children, and the
2005 semester. Bruce and Toni can claim a college meet all of the requirements for theIllustrated Example$1,200 (20% × $6,000) lifetime learning credit higher education credits. Because Sean is be-
on their 2005 joint tax return. yond the second (sophomore) year of his post-Dave and Valerie Jones are married and file asecondary education, his expenses do notjoint tax return. For 2005, they claim exemptionsForm 1098-T. To help you figure your lifetime qualify for the Hope credit. But, amounts paid forfor their two dependent children on their taxlearning credit, you should receive Form Sean’s expenses in 2005 for academic periodsreturn. Their modified adjusted gross income is1098-T. Generally, an eligible educational insti- beginning in 2005 and the first 3 months of 2006$90,000. Their tax, before credits, is $9,956.tution (such as a college or university) must qualify for the lifetime learning credit. Corey is inTheir son, Sean, will receive his bachelor’s de-send Form 1098-T (or acceptable substitute) to her first two (freshman and sophomore) years ofgree in psychology from the state college in Mayeach enrolled student by January 31, 2006. postsecondary education, and expenses paid2006. Their daughter, Corey, enrolled full-timefor her in 2005, for academic periods beginningat that same college in August 2004, to beginClaiming the Credit in 2005 and January 2006, qualify for the Hopeworking on her bachelor’s degree in physicalcredit.education. In July 2005, Dave and Valerie paidYou claim the lifetime learning credit by complet- Dave and Valerie figure their tentative edu-$2,200 in tuition costs for each child for the Falling Parts II and III of Form 8863 and submitting it cation credits for 2005, $2,460, as shown in the2005 semester. In December 2005, they alsowith your Form 1040 or 1040A. Enter the credit completed Form 8863. They cannot claim thepaid $2,600 of tuition for each child for theon Form 1040, line 50, or Form 1040A, line 31. full amount because their modified adjustedSpring 2006 semester that begins in January.An illustrated example using Form 8863 is gross income is more than $87,000. They carry
shown at the end of this chapter. the amount from line 19 of Form 8863, $2,091,
to line 50 of Form 1040, and they attach the
Form 8863 to their return.
Page 230 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 233 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
October 25, 2004(subject to change)
Jones 137 00 9642 2,000 1,000 500
1,500
5001,000
Sean 246 00 9731 4,800
4,800
4,800
960
2,460
2,091
9,956
2,091
Corey
1,000
850
105,000
88,000
17,000
20,000
Dave and Valerie Jones 987 00 6543
Jones
Last name
9,956
-0-
OMB No. 1545-1618Education Credits
Form 8863
/H17075See instructions.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 50
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Hope Credit. Caution: You cannot take the Hope credit for more than 2 tax years for the same student.
1
2
3
Lifetime Learning Credit
Form 8863 (2004)
Part I
Part II
3
(a) Student’s name
(as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
Cat. No. 25379M
Add the amounts in columns (d) and (f)
Tentative Hope credit. Add the amounts on line 2, columns (d) and (f). If you are taking
the lifetime learning credit for another student, go to Part II; otherwise, go to Part III /H17075
8
Add the amounts on line 4, column (c), and enter the total
9
9
Enter the smaller of line 5 or $10,000
10
Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take
any education credits
10
12
16
4
11
11
15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3.
(f) Enter one-half
of the amount in
column (e)
(e) Subtract
column (d) from
column (c)
(d) Enter the
smaller of the
amount in
column (c) or
$1,000
(c) Qualified
expenses (see
instructions). Do
not enter more
than $2,000 for
each student.
2
Caution: You
cannot take the
Hope credit and
the lifetime learning
credit for the same
student in the
same year.
(a) Student’s name (as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
First name
(c) Qualified
expenses (see
instructions)
Tentative lifetime learning credit. Multiply line 6 by 20% (.20) and go to Part III /H17075
5
6
7
5
6
7
Part III Allowable Education Credits
Tentative education credits. Add lines 3 and 78
Enter: $105,000 if married filing jointly; $52,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er)
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 37*, or Form 1040A, line 22
If line 11 is equal to or more than line 12, enter the amount from line 8 on line 14 and
go to line 15. If line 11 is less than line 12, divide line 11 by line 12. Enter the result as
a decimal (rounded to at least three places)
13
Multiply line 8 by line 13 /H1707514
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 45, or Form 1040A, line 28 15
18
Subtract line 16 from line 15. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take any education
credits /H17075
Education credits. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 17 here and on Form 1040,
line 49, or Form 1040A, line 31 /H17075
14
13 /H11003.
(Hope and Lifetime Learning Credits)
(b) Student’s
social security
number (as
shown on page 1
of your tax return)
(b) Student’s social security
number (as shown on page
1 of your tax return)
Enter: $20,000 if married filing jointly; $10,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er) 12
* If you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563 or you are excluding income from Puerto Rico, see Pub. 970 for the amount to ente r.
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Last name
First name
Caution: You cannot take both an education credit and the tuition and fees deduction (Form 1040, line 27, or Form 1040A, 
line 19) for the same student in the same year.
2004
17
18
16
17
Enter the total, if any, of your credits from Form 1040, lines 46 through 48, or Form
1040A, lines 29 and 30
(99)
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 231

Page 234 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items
You may want to see:Reminders
36. PublicationIncreased EIC on certain joint returns.A
married person filing a joint return may get more❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)
EIC than someone with the same income but a
different filing status. As a result, the EIC tableForm (and Instructions)Earned Income has different columns for married persons filing
❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Creditjointly than for everyone else. When you look up (Qualifying Child Information)Credit your EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the
correct column for your filing status and the❏ W-5 Earned Income Credit Advance
number of children you have. Payment Certificate
❏ 8862 Information To Claim EarnedAdvance payment of the earned incomeWhat’s New Income Credit After Disallowancecredit in your paycheck.If you expect to
qualify for the earned income credit in 2006, youQualifying child.There are some changes tocan receive part of it in each paycheck through-the definition of qualifying child. A qualifyingout the year. See Advance Earned Incomechild can include your eligible foster child, yourCredit, later, for more information.brother, or your sister, whether or not you care
Do You Qualify for thefor them as you would your own child. See Rule Online help.You can use the EITC Assistant
8. at www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligibleCredit?for the credit. The EITC Assistant is available inIf you and someone else have the same
English and Spanish.qualifying child, only one of you can use that To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meetchild to claim the following tax benefits: the all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules forEIC questioned by IRS.The IRS may ask youchild’s exemption, the child tax credit, head of Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in Partto provide documents to prove you are entitledhousehold filing status, the credit for child and B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Partto claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu-dependent care expenses, and the EIC. The C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child.ments to send us. These may include: birthother person cannot take any of these five tax There is one final rule you must meet in Part D,certificates, school records, medical records,benefits unless he or she has a different qualify- Figuring and Claiming the EIC. You qualify foretc. We will also send you a letter with the name,ing child. For details, see Rule 9. the credit if you meet all the rules in each partaddress, and telephone number of the IRS em-that applies to you.ployee assigned to your case. The process ofEarned income amount is more. The maxi-
establishing your eligibility will delay your re-• If you have a qualifying child, the rules inmum amount of income you can earn and still
fund. Parts A, B, and D apply to you.get the credit has increased. You may be able to
take the credit if: • If you do not have a qualifying child, the
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.• You have more than one qualifying child
and you earned less than $35,263 Introduction Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-($37,263 if married filing jointly),
shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B,The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for• You have one qualifying child and you C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rulescertain people who work and have less thanearned less than $31,030 ($33,030 if mar- in each part.$37,263 of earned income. A tax credit usuallyried filing jointly), or means more money in your pocket. It reduces
Do you have a qualifying child?You have a• You do not have a qualifying child and youthe amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also
qualifying child only if you have a child whoearned less than $11,750 ($13,750 if mar-give you a refund.
meets the three tests described in Rule 8 andried filing jointly).
illustrated in Figure 36-1.
Your adjusted gross income also must be lessHow do you get the earned income credit?
than the amount in the above list that applies toTo claim the EIC, you must: If Improper Claimyou. For details, see Rules 1 and 15.
1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, andMade in Prior YearKatrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
2. File a tax return, even if you:This Act provides tax relief for persons affected If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied or
by Hurricane Katrina. Under the Act, you may be reduced for any reason other than a math ora. Do not owe any tax,able to figure your 2005 EIC using your 2004 clerical error, you must attach a completed Form
b. Did not earn enough money to file aearned income if your 2005 earned income is 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.
return, orless than your 2004 earned income. You must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-
ing the rules described in this chapter.You may also be able to claim a student as ac. Did not have income taxes withheld
However, if your EIC was denied or reducedqualifying child even if he or she was preventedfrom your pay.
as a result of a math or clerical error, do notfrom completing the normal school term. See
attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. ForPublication 4492. When you complete your return, you can
example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRSfigure your EIC by using a worksheet in the
Investment income amount is more. The can correct it. If you do not provide a correctinstructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or
maximum amount of investment income you can social security number, the IRS can deny theForm 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let the
have and still get the credit has increased to EIC. These kinds of errors are called math orIRS figure the credit for you.
clerical errors.$2,700. See Rule 6.
If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-Form 8836. If you received Form 8836, Quali-How will this chapter help you? nied and it was determined that your error was
fying Children Residency Statement, you have due to reckless or intentional disregard of theThis chapter will explain the following:been selected to participate in the EIC certifica- EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
tion pilot program. File the form with the IRS,• The rules you must meet to qualify for thenext 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then
following the form instructions, to show that yourEIC, you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.
child met the residency test described in Rule 8. • How to figure the EIC, andIf you did not receive the form, you do not need More information.See chapter 5 in Publica-
• How to get advance payment of the EIC into get it or file it. You have to file Form 8836 only tion 596 for more detailed information about the
your paycheck.if it was mailed to you. disallowance period and Form 8862.
Page 232 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 235 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross2. You must have a valid8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, and least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency tests. age 65.
•$35,263 ($37,263 for
•$35,263 ($37,263 for cannot be “Married filing9. Your qualifying child12. You cannot be the married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if separately.” cannot be used by more dependent of another have more than one
you have more than one4. You must be a U.S. than one person to claim person. qualifying child,
qualifying child, citizen or resident alien the EIC. 13. You cannot be a
all year. 10. You cannot be a qualifying child of
•$31,030 ($33,030 for
•$31,030 ($33,030 for 5. You cannot file Form qualifying child of another another person. married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ person. 14. You must have have one qualifying child, or
you have one qualifying (relating to foreign lived in the United
child, or earned income). States more than half
•$11,750 ($13,750 for
6. Your investment of the year. married filing jointly) if you do
•$11,750 ($13,750 for income must be $2,700 not have a qualifying child.
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you do not have a 7. You must have
qualifying child. earned income.
different from the community property rules that (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form 1040EZ). You
apply under Rule 7. cannot claim the EIC.Part A. Rules for
Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if
Rule 2. You Must Have aEveryone filing a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can
apply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application forValid Social SecurityThis part of the chapter discusses Rules 1 a Social Security Card, with the Social SecurityNumber (SSN)through 7. You must meet all seven rules to Administration.qualify for the earned income credit. If you do notTo claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing aFiling deadline approaching and still nomeet all seven rules, you cannot get the creditjoint return) must have a valid SSN issued by theand you do not need to read the rest of the SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching andSocial Security Administration (SSA). Any quali-chapter. you still do not have an SSN, you have twofying child listed on Schedule EIC also mustchoices.If you meet all seven rules in this part, thenhave a valid SSN. (See Rule 8 if you have aread either Part B or Part C (whichever applies)qualifying child.)for more rules you must meet. 1. Request an automatic 6-month extensionIf your social security card (or your spouse’s
of time to file your return. You can get thisif filing a joint return) says “Not valid for employ-
extension by filing Form 4868, ApplicationRule 1. Your AGI Must Be ment” and your SSN was issued so that you (or
for Automatic Extension of Time to Fileyour spouse) could get a federally funded bene-Less Than: fit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of aU.S. Individual Income Tax Return. For
federally funded benefit is Medicaid. more information, see chapter 1.• $35,263 ($37,263 for married filing jointly)If you have a card with the legend “Not valid2. File the return on time without claiming theif you have more than one qualifying child,for employment” and your immigration status EIC. After receiving the SSN, file anhas changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen• $31,030 ($33,030 for married filing jointly) amended return (Form 1040X, Amendedor permanent resident, ask the SSA for a newif you have one qualifying child, or U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim-social security card without the legend.• $11,750 ($13,750 for married filing jointly) ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EIC
if you do not have a qualifying child.U. S. citizen.If you were a U. S. citizen whenif you have a qualifying child.
you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN.
Adjusted gross income (AGI). AGI is the
Valid for work only with INS or DHS authori-Rule 3. Your Filing Statusamount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form
zation. If your social security card reads “Valid1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is Cannot Be Married Filingfor work only with INS authorization,” or “Validequal to or more than the applicable limit listed
for work only with DHS authorization,” you haveabove, you cannot claim the EIC. Separately
a valid SSN.
If you are married, you usually must file a jointExample. Your AGI is $32,500, you are sin-SSN missing or incorrect.If an SSN for youreturn to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotgle, and you have one qualifying child. You can-or your spouse is missing from your tax return ornot claim the EIC because your AGI is not less be “Married filing separately.”is incorrect, you may not get the EIC.than $31,030. However, if your filing status was
married filing jointly, you might be able to claimOther taxpayer identification number.You Spouse did not live with you.If you are mar-the EIC because your AGI is less than $33,030.cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (orried and your spouse did not live in your home atCommunity property. If you are married,your spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi-any time during the last 6 months of the year,but qualify to file as head of household undervidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).you may be able to file as head of household,special rules for married taxpayers living apartITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv-instead of married filing separately. In that case,(see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu-ice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN.
you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailednity property laws, your AGI includes that portion
information about filing as head of household,of both your and your spouse’s wages that youNo SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put
see chapter 2.are required to include in gross income. This is “No” next to line 66a (Form 1040), line 41a
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 233

Page 236 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cussed in this section in terms of what is or is notRule 4. You Must Be a Rule 7. You Must Have earned income for purposes of the EIC.
Earned IncomeU.S. Citizen or Resident Form 4361. Even if you have an approved
Alien All Year Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-This credit is called the earned income credit
ing ministerial duties as an employee count asbecause, to qualify, you must work and haveYou cannot claim the earned income credit if you earned income. This includes wages, salaries,earned income. If you are married and file a joint
are a nonresident alien for any part of the year, tips, and other taxable employee compensation.return, you meet this rule if at least one spouse
Amounts you received for performing ministerialunless: works and has earned income. If you are an
duties, but not as an employee, do not count asemployee, earned income includes all the tax-
earned income. Examples include fees for per-1. You are married to a U.S. citizen or a resi-able income you get from your employer. If you
forming marriages and honoraria for deliveringdent alien, and are self-employed or a statutory employee, you
speeches.will figure your earned income on EIC Work-2. You choose to be treated as a resident forsheet B in the instructions for Form 1040.Form 4029. Even if you have an approvedall of 2005 by filing a joint return. If you
Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and otherneed more information on making this
taxable employee compensation count aschoice, see Publication 519, U.S. TaxEarned Income earned income. However, amounts you re-Guide for Aliens. ceived as a self-employed individual do notEarned income includes all of the followingcount as earned income. Also, in figuring earnedtypes of income.Note. If you make the choice in (2) above, income, do not subtract losses on Schedule C,
you and your spouse are taxed on your world- C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040.1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable
wide income. You cannot claim any tax treatyemployee pay. Employee pay is earned
benefits as a resident of a foreign country duringincome only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em-
Disability Benefitsa tax year in which the choice is in effect. ployee pay, such as certain dependent
care benefits and adoption benefits, is notIf you retired on disability, benefits you receiveearned income. But there is an exceptionRule 5. You Cannot File under your employer’s disability retirement planfor nontaxable combat pay, which you canare considered earned income until you reachchoose to include in earned income, asForm 2555 or Form minimum retirement age. Minimum retirementexplained below.2555-EZ age generally is the earliest age at which you
2. Net earnings from self-employment. could have received a pension or annuity if you
You cannot claim the earned income credit if you were not disabled. You must report your taxable3. Gross income received as a statutory em-file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form disability payments on line 7 of either Form 1040ployee.2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion. or Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-
ment age.You file these forms to exclude income earned inWages, salaries, and tips.Wages, salaries, Beginning on the day after you reach mini-foreign countries from your gross income, or toand tips you receive for working are reported tomum retirement age, payments you receive arededuct or exclude a foreign housing amount.you on Form W-2, box 1. You should reporttaxable as a pension and are not consideredU.S. possessions are not foreign countries. Seethese on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Formsearned income. Report taxable pension pay-Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and1040A and 1040). ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (orResident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor- Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b).Nontaxable combat pay election.You canmation. elect to have your nontaxable combat pay in-Disability insurance payments.Paymentscluded in earned income for the earned incomeyou received from a disability insurance policyRule 6. Your Investment credit. Electing to include nontaxable combatthat you paid the premiums for are not earnedpay in earned income may increase or decreaseIncome Must Be $2,700 or income. It does not matter whether you haveyour EIC. Figure the credit with and without yourreached minimum retirement age. If this policy isLess nontaxable combat pay before making the elec-through your employer, the amount may betion. If you make the election, you must includeshown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code “J.”You cannot claim the earned income credit un-in earned income all nontaxable combat pay you
less your investment income is $2,700 or less. Ifreceived. If you are filing a joint return and both
your investment income is more than $2,700,you and your spouse received nontaxable com-Income That Is Not Earned Incomeyou cannot claim the credit. For most people,bat pay, you can each make your own election.
The amount of your nontaxable combat payinvestment income is the total of the following Examples of items that are not earned income
should be shown on your Form W-2, in box 12,amounts. include interest and dividends, pensions and
with code Q. annuities, social security and railroad retirement
• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or benefits (including disability benefits), alimonySelf-employed persons and statutory em-1040A). and child support, welfare benefits, workers’ployees. If you are self-employed or receivedcompensation benefits, unemployment com-• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040income as a statutory employee, you must usepensation (insurance), nontaxable foster careor 1040A). the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualifypayments, and veterans’ benefits, including VAto get the EIC.• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or rehabilitation payments. Do not include any of
1040A). these items in your earned income.
• Capital gain net income (line 13 of FormApproved Form 4361 or Form 4029 Earnings while an inmate.Amounts received
1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form for work performed while an inmate in a penalThis section is for persons who have an ap-1040A). institution are not earned income when figuringproved: the earned income credit. This includesIf you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income amounts for work performed while in a work• Form 4361, Application for Exemptionis the total of the amount of line 2 and the release program or while in a halfway house.from Self-Employment Tax for Use by Min-amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote toisters, Members of Religious Orders, andWorkfare payments. Nontaxable workfarethe right of the words “Form 1040EZ” on line 2.Christian Science Practitioners, or payments are not earned income for the EIC.However, if you are reporting income or loss These are cash payments certain people re-• Form 4029, Application for Exemptionfrom the rental of personal property on Form ceive from a state or local agency that adminis-from Social Security and Medicare Taxes
1040, line 21, or are filing Schedule E (Form ters public assistance programs funded underand Waiver of Benefits.
1040), Form 8814, or Form 4797, see Rule 6 in the federal Temporary Assistance for Needy
chapter 1 of Publication 596 for more informa-Each approved form exempts certain income Families (TANF) program in return for certain
tion. from social security taxes. Each form is dis- work activities such as (1) work experience ac-
Page 234 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 237 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son, daughter, stepchild, eligible foster child, or a descendant of
any of them (for example, your grandchild)
or
was at the end of 2005...
Under age 19
OR
Under age 24 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year, regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States
for more than half of 2005.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a
descendant of any of them (for example, your niece or nephew)
tivities (including remodeling or repairing public Rule 8. Your Child Musthousing) if sufficient private sector employmentPart B. Rules Meet the Relationship,is not available, or (2) community service pro-
gram activities. If You Have a Age, and Residency Tests
Community property. If you are married, but Your child is a qualifying child if your child meetsQualifying Childqualify to file as head of household under special three tests. The three tests are:rules for married taxpayers living apart (seeIf you have met all of the rules in Part A, readRule 3), and live in a state that has community 1. Relationship,Part B to see if you have a qualifying child.property laws, your earned income for the EICPart B discusses Rules 8 through 10. You 2. Age, anddoes not include any amount earned by yourmust meet all three of these rules, in addition tospouse that is treated as belonging to you under 3. Residency.the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for thethose laws. That amount is not earned incomeearned income credit with a qualifying child.The three tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1.for the EIC, even though you must include it in
The paragraphs that follow contain more infor-your gross income on your income tax return.You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A tomation about each test.Your earned income includes the entire amountclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannotyou earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-file Form 1040EZ). You also must completeing to your spouse under your state’s communitySchedule EIC and attach it to your return. If youRelationship Testproperty laws. meet all the rules in Part A and this part, read
To be your qualifying child, a child must be your:Part D to find out what to do next.Nontaxable military pay.Nontaxable pay for
members of the Armed Forces is not considered • Son, daughter, stepchild, eligible fosterIf you do not meet Rule 8, you do notearned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax- child, or a descendant of any of them (forhave a qualifying child. Read Part C toable military pay are combat pay, the Basic example, your grandchild), orfind out if you can get the earnedCAUTION
!
Allowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basicincome credit without a qualifying child. • Brother, sister, half brother, half sister,Allowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica-
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant oftion 3, Armed Forces’ Tax Guide, for more infor-
any of them (for example, your niece ormation.
nephew).Combat pay. You can elect to have
your nontaxable combat pay consid-
ered earned income for the EIC. See
TIP
Nontaxable combat pay election, earlier.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 235

Page 238 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following definitions clarify the relationship ing courses, correspondence schools, and In- part of the year before the date of the kidnap-
test. ternet schools do not count as schools for the ping. The child must be presumed by law en-
EIC. forcement authorities to have been kidnapped
Adopted child. An adopted child is always by someone who is not a member of your familyVocational high school students. Stu-treated as your own child. The term “adopted or your child’s family. This treatment applies fordents who work on co-op jobs in private industrychild” includes a child who was lawfully placed all years until the child is returned. However, theas a part of a school’s regular course of class-with you for legal adoption. last year this treatment can apply is the earlierroom and practical training are consideredof:full-time students.Eligible foster child.For the EIC, a person is
your eligible foster child if the child is placed with 1. The year there is a determination that thePermanently and totally disabled. Youryou by an authorized placement agency or by child is dead, orchild is permanently and totally disabled if bothjudgement, decree, or other order of any court ofof the following apply. 2. The year the child would have reachedcompetent jurisdiction. An authorized placement age 18.agency includes a state or local government1. He or she cannot engage in any substan-
agency. It also includes a tax-exempt organiza- If your qualifying child has been kidnappedtial gainful activity because of a physical or
tion licensed by a state. In addition, it includes and meets these requirements, enter “KC,” in-mental condition.
an Indian tribal government or an organization stead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC.2. A doctor determines the condition hasauthorized by an Indian tribal government to
lasted or can be expected to last continu-place Indian children. Social security number.Your qualifying childously for at least a year or can lead tomust have a valid social security number (SSN)death.Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, was unless the child was born and died in 2005. You
placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorized cannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifying
agency responsible for placing children in foster child if:
homes. Debbie is your eligible foster child.Residency Test
1. Your qualifying child’s SSN is missing fromMarried child.If your child was married at theYour child must have lived with you in the Unitedyour tax return or is incorrect,end of the year, he or she does not meet theStates for more than half of 2005. The following2. Your qualifying child’s social security cardrelationship test unless either of these two situa-definitions clarify the residency test. says “Not valid for employment” and wastions applies to you: 
issued only for use in getting a federallyUnited States.This means the 50 states and1. You can claim the child’s exemption, or funded benefit, orthe District of Columbia. It does not include
Puerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.2. The reason you cannot claim the child’s 3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child
exemption is that you gave that right to has:Homeless shelter. Your home can be anyyour child’s other parent under the Special location where you regularly live. You do nota. An individual taxpayer identificationrule for divorced or separated parents, de- need a traditional home. For example, if your number (ITIN), which is issued to ascribed later. child lived with you for more than half the year innoncitizen who cannot get an SSN, or
one or more homeless shelters, your child
b. An adoption taxpayer identificationmeets the residency test.
number (ATIN), which is issued toAge Test
adopting parents who cannot get anMilitary personnel stationed outside the
Your child must be: SSN for the child being adopted untilUnited States. U.S. military personnel sta-
the adoption is final.tioned outside the United States on extended1. Under age 19 at the end of 2005, active duty are considered to live in the United
If you have two qualifying children and onlyStates during that duty period for purposes of2. A full-time student under age 24 at the end
one has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC onlythe EIC.of 2005, or
on the basis of that child. For more informationExtended active duty. Extended active3. Permanently and totally disabled at any about SSNs, see Rule 2.duty means you are called or ordered to duty fortime during 2005, regardless of age.
an indefinite period or for a period of more thanThe following example and definitions clarify the Rule 9. Your Qualifying90 days. Once you begin serving your extendedage test. active duty, you are still considered to have beenChild Cannot Be Used Byon extended active duty even if you do not serveExample. Your son turned 19 on December More Than One Person Tomore than 90 days.10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu-
Claim the EICdent, he is not a qualifying child because, at theBirth or death of a child.A child who was
end of the year, he was not under age 19.born or died in 2005 is treated as having livedSometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali-with you for all of 2005 if your home was thefying child of more than one person. However,Full-time student.A full-time student is a stu-child’s home the entire time he or she was aliveonly one person can treat that child as a qualify-dent who is enrolled for the number of hours orin 2005. ing child and claim the EIC using that child. Thecourses the school considers to be full-time at-
paragraphs that follow will help you decide whotendance. Temporary absences. Count time that you or
can claim the EIC when more than one personyour child is away from home on a temporaryStudent defined.To qualify as a student, has the same qualifying child.absence due to a special circumstance as timeyour child must be, during some part of each of
lived with you. Examples of a special circum-any 5 calendar months during the calendar year: You can choose which person will claim thestance include:
EIC. If you and someone else have the same1. A full-time student at a school that has a• Illness, qualifying child, you and the other person(s) canregular teaching staff, course of study, and
decide which of you, if otherwise eligible, willregularly enrolled student body, or • School attendance,
take all of the following tax benefits based on the2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-• Detention in a juvenile facility, qualifying child.ing course given by a school described in• Business,(1), or a state, county, or local government. • The child’s exemption.
• Vacation, andThe 5 calendar months need not be consecu- • The child tax credit.
tive. • Military service. • Head of household filing status.
School defined. A school can be an ele- • The credit for child and dependent carementary school, junior or senior high school,Kidnapped child.A kidnapped child is treatedexpenses.college, university, or technical, trade, or as living with you for more than half of the year if
mechanical school. However, on-the-job train- the child lived with you for more than half the• The EIC.
Page 236 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 239 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The other person cannot take any of these fiveTable 36-2.When More Than One Person Claims EIC Using Same Child
tax benefits unless he or she has a different (Tie-Breaker Rule)qualifying child.
Caution: If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parentIf you and the other person(s) cannot agree under the rules for divorced or separated parents, described later, seeand more than one person claims the EIC or the Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents.other tax benefits just listed using the same
child, the tie-breaker rule (explained in TableIF more than one person claims the36-2) applies. However, the tie-breaker rulethe same child as a qualifying childdoes not apply if the other person is your spouseand . . . THEN . . .and you file a joint return.
Only one of the persons is the child’s Only the parent can treat the child as aIf a child is treated as the qualifying
parent qualifying child.child of the noncustodial parent under
the special rule for children of di-CAUTION
!
Two of the persons are parents of the Only the parent with whom the child lived thevorced or separated parents, described next,child, and they do not file a joint return longest during the year can treat the child assee Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separatedtogether a qualifying child.parents, later.
Two of the persons are parents of the Only the parent with the highest adjusted
If another person claims the EIC using thischild, the child lived with each parent the gross income (AGI) can treat the child as a
child. If your EIC is denied because your qual-same amount of time during the year, qualifying child.
ifying child is treated under this rule as the quali-and the parents do not file a joint returnfying child of another person for 2005, you maytogetherbe able to take the EIC using a different qualify-
ing child, but you cannot take the EIC for peopleNone of the persons are the child’s Only the person with the highest AGI can
who do not have a qualifying child. parent treat the child as a qualifying child.
If the other person cannot claim the EIC.If
you and someone else have the same qualifyingyou can use one child and your mother can use cannot claim the EIC or the credit for child and
child but the other person cannot claim the EIC dependent care expenses. See Rule 3.the other two.
because he or she is not eligible or his or her
earned income or AGI is too high, you may be Example 7 – separated parents.The factsExample 4 – parent is qualifying child of
able to treat the child as a qualifying child. See are the same as in Example 6 except that yougrandparent. The facts are the same as in
Example 5. But also see You can choose which and your husband both claim your son as aExample 1 except that you are only 18 years old.
person will claim the EIC, earlier. qualifying child. In this case, only your husbandThis means you are a qualifying child of your
will be allowed to treat your son as a qualifyingmother. Because of Rule 10, discussed next,Example 1 – child lived with parent and child. This is because, during 2005, the boy livedyou cannot claim the EIC. Only your mother maygrandparent. You and your 2-year-old son with him longer than with you. You cannot claimbe able to treat your son as a qualifying child tolived with your mother all year. You are 25 years the EIC for persons either with or without aclaim the EIC. If your mother meets all the otherold. Your only income was $9,000 from a qualifying child. However, because you and yourrequirements for claiming the EIC, she can treatpart-time job. Your mother’s only income was husband did not live apart the last 6 months ofboth you and your son as qualifying children for$20,000 from her job. Your son is a qualifying the year your husband cannot claim head ofthe EIC.child of both you and your mother because he household filing status. As a result, his filing
meets the relationship, age, and residency tests status is married filing separately, so he cannotExample 5 – parent can claim EIC becausefor both you and your mother. However, only claim the EIC or the credit for child and depen-grandparent cannot.The facts are the sameone of you can treat him as a qualifying child to dent care expenses. See Rule 3.as in Example 1 except that your mother earnedclaim the EIC (and, if that person qualifies, the$50,000 from her job. Because your mother’sother tax benefits listed in You can choose which Example 8 – unmarried parents. You,earned income is too high for her to claim theperson will claim the EIC, earlier). You agree to your 5-year-old son, and your son’s father livedEIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son.let your mother claim him. together all year. You and your son’s father are
This means, if you do not claim your son as a not married. Your son is a qualifying child of bothExample 6 – separated parents. You,qualifying child for the EIC or any of the other tax you and his father because he meets the rela-your husband, and your 10-year-old son livedbenefits listed in You can choose which person tionship, age, and residency tests for both youtogether until August 1, 2005, when your hus-will claim the EIC, your mother can treat your and his father. You earned $8,000 and yourband moved out of the household. In August andson as a qualifying child to claim the EIC and son’s father earned $18,000. Neither of you hadSeptember, your son lived with you. For the restany other tax benefit listed for which she quali- any other income. Your son’s father agrees to letof the year, your son lived with your husband.fies. you treat the child as a qualifying child. ThisYour son is a qualifying child of both you andmeans, if your son’s father does not claim youryour husband because your son lived with eachExample 2 – child lived with parent and son as a qualifying child for the EIC or any of theof you for more than half the year and becausegrandparent. The facts are the same as in other tax benefits listed in You can choose whichhe met the relationship and age tests for both ofExample 1 except that you and your mother both person will claim the EIC, earlier, you can claimyou. You and your husband are not divorced,claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, him as a qualifying child for the EIC and anylegally separated, or separated under a writtenyou as the child’s parent will be the only one other tax benefit listed for which you qualify.separation agreement, so the special rule forallowed to claim your son as a qualifying child fordivorced or separated parents does not apply.the EIC and the other tax benefits listed in You Example 9 – unmarried parents. The
You and your husband will file separate re-can choose which person will claim the EIC. The facts are the same as in Example 8 except that
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat yourIRS will disallow your mother’s claim to the EIC you and your son’s father both claim your son as
son as a qualifying child. This means, if yourand any other tax benefit listed, unless she has a qualifying child. In this case, only your son’s
husband does not claim your son as a qualifyinganother qualifying child. father will be allowed to treat your son as a
child for the EIC or any of the other tax benefitsqualifying child. This is because his AGI,
listed in You can choose which person will claimExample 3 – three children lived with par- $18,000, is more than your AGI, $8,000. You
the EIC, earlier, you can claim him as a qualify-ent and grandparent.The facts are the same cannot claim the EIC for persons either with or
ing child for the EIC and any other tax benefitas in Example 1 except that you also have two without a qualifying child.
listed for which you qualify. However, you can-other young children who are qualifying children
not claim head of household filing status be-of both you and your mother. Only one of you Example 10 – child did not live with a
cause you and your husband did not live apartcan claim each child as a qualifying child. How- parent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your
ever, you and your mother can split the three the last 6 months of the year. As a result, yoursister’s child, lived with your mother all year. You
qualifying children between you. For example,filing status is married filing separately, so youare 25 years old, and your only income was
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 237

Page 240 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$9,300 from a part-time job. Your mother’s only person file a return claiming the child as a quali-Rule 11. You Must Be atincome was $15,000 from her job. Your niece isfying child for any of these three tax benefits, the
a qualifying child of both you and your mother Least Age 25 but UnderIRS will disallow all but one of the claims using
because she meets the relationship, age, andthe tie-breaker rule in Table 36-2. Age 65residency tests for both you and your mother.
However, only one of you can treat her as a You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 atRule 10. You Cannot Be aqualifying child. Your mother agrees to let you the end of 2005. If you are married filing a jointtreat the child as a qualifying child. This means,Qualifying Child of return, either you or your spouse must be atif your mother does not claim her as a qualifyingAnother Person least age 25 but under age 65 at the end ofchild for the EIC or any of the other tax benefits
2005. It does not matter which spouse meets thelisted in You can choose which person will claimYou are a qualifying child of another personage test, as long as one of the spouses does.the EIC, you can claim your niece as a qualifying(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allchild for the EIC and any other tax benefit listed If neither you nor your spouse meets the ageof the following statements are true.for which you qualify. test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put “No” next to
line 66a (Form 1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or1. You are that person’s son, daughter,Example 11 – child did not live with a line 8a (Form 1040EZ).stepchild, grandchild, or eligible fosterparent. The facts are the same as in Example child. Or, you are that person’s brother,10 except that you and your mother both claim Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried.sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,your niece as a qualifying child. In this case, only You meet the age test.or stepsister (or the child or grandchild ofyour mother will be allowed to treat your niece asthat person’s brother, sister, half brother,a qualifying child. This is because your mother’s Example 2. You are married and filing ahalf sister, stepbrother, or stepsister).AGI, $15,000, is more than your AGI, $9,300. joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is2. At the end of the year you were under ageage 27. You meet the age test because yourSpecial rule for divorced or separated 19, or under age 24 and a full-time stu-spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.parents. A child will be treated as the qualify-dent, or any age if you were permanently
ing child of his or her noncustodial parent (forand totally disabled at any time during the
purposes of claiming an exemption, but not for Rule 12. You Cannot Beyear.
EIC) if all of the following apply. the Dependent of Another3. You lived with that person in the United
States for more than half of the year.1. The parents: Person
For more details about the tests to be a qualify-a. Are divorced or legally separated under If you are not filing a joint return, you meet thising child, see Rule 8.a decree of divorce or separate mainte- rule if:If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)nance,
are a qualifying child of another person, you• You checked box 6a on Form 1040 orb. Are separated under a written separa-cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the1040A, ortion agreement, or person for whom you are a qualifying child does
• You did not check the “You” box on line 5c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim
months of the year. of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $8,200the EIC. Put “No” beside line 66a (Form 1040) or
line 41a (Form 1040A). on that line.
2. The child received over half of his or her
support for the year from the parents. Example. You and your daughter lived with If you are filing a joint return, you meet this
your mother all year. You are 22 years old andrule if:3. The child is in the custody of one or bothattended a trade school full time. You had aparents for more than half of the year. • You checked both box 6a and box 6b onpart-time job and earned $5,700. You had no
4. A decree of divorce or separate mainte- Form 1040 or 1040A, orother income. Because you meet the relation-
nance or written separation agreement thatship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-• You and your spouse did not check eitherapplies to 2005 provides that the noncus-ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC ifthe “You” box or the “Spouse” box on linetodial parent can claim the child as a de-she meets all the other requirements. Because5 of Form 1040EZ, and you enteredpendent (and, in the case of a pre-1985you are your mother’s qualifying child, you can-$16,400 on that line.agreement, the noncustodial parent pro-not claim the EIC. This is so even if your mothervides at least $600 for the support of thecannot or does not claim the EIC. If you are not sure whether someone else canchild during the year) or the custodial par-
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)ent signs a written declaration that he or
she will not claim the child as a dependent as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a
for the year. dependent in chapter 3.
Part C. Rules If someone else can claim you (or yourFor details, see chapter 3. Also see, Apply-
ing Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents, spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent onIf You Do Not Havelater. his or her return, but does not, you still cannot
claim the credit.a Qualifying ChildApplying Rule 9 to divorced or separated
Example 1. In 2005, you were age 25, sin-parents. If a child is treated as the qualifyingRead this part if you:child of the noncustodial parent under the spe- gle, and living at home with your parents. You
cial rule for children of divorced or separated worked and were not a student. You earned1. Do not have a qualifying child, andparents described earlier, the noncustodial par- $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as a2. Have met all the rules in Part A.ent can claim an exemption and the child tax dependent. When you file your return, you claimcredit for the child but cannot claim the child as a an exemption for yourself by not checking thequalifying child for head of household filing sta-Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You must “You” box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and bytus, the credit for child and dependent care ex-meet all four of these rules, in addition to theentering $8,200 on that line. You meet this rule.penses, or the EIC. If the child is the qualifyingrules in Parts A and D , to qualify for the earnedchild of more than one other person, only one ofincome credit without a qualifying child. Example 2. The facts are the same as inthose persons can claim the child as a qualifying Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. YourIf you have a qualifying child, the ruleschild for head of household filing status, the
parents can claim you as a dependent but de-in this part do not apply to you. Youcredit for child and dependent care expenses,
cide not to. You do not meet this rule. Youcan claim the credit only if you meetand the EIC. No other person can claim any ofCAUTION
!
cannot claim the credit because your parentsall the rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 tothese three tax benefits unless he or she has a
different qualifying child. If you and any otherfind out if you have a qualifying child. could have claimed you as a dependent.
Page 238 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 241 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
house. If you received any amount forRule 13. You Cannot Be a work done while an inmate in a penal insti-Part D. Figuring andQualifying Child of tution and that amount is included in the
total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)Claiming the EICAnother Person or line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put “PRI” and the
amount on the dotted line next to line 7You are a qualifying child of another personRead this part if you have met all the rules in(Form 1040), in the space to the left of the(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C. entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or inof the following statements are true. Part D discusses Rule 15. You must meet the space to the left of line 1 (Formthis rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A and B, 1040EZ).1. You are that person’s son, daughter, or Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in-
stepchild, grandchild, or eligible fostercome credit.
• Deferred compensation plans. A pen-child. Or, you are that person’s brother,This part of the chapter also explains how tosion or annuity from a nonqualified de-sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,figure the amount of your credit. You have twoferred compensation plan or aor stepsister (or the child or grandchild ofchoices. nongovernmental section 457 plan is notthat person’s brother, sister, half brother, considered earned income for the earned1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If youhalf sister, stepbrother, or stepsister). income credit. If you received such anwant to do this, see IRS Will Figure the amount and it was included in the total on2. At the end of the year you were under ageEIC for You. line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line19, or under age 24 and a full-time stu-
1 (Form 1040EZ), put “DFC” and the2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to dodent, or any age if you were permanently
amount on the dotted line next to line 7this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.and totally disabled at any time during the
(Form 1040), in the space to the left of theyear.
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or in3. You lived with that person in the United the space to the left of line 1 (FormRule 15. Your EarnedStates for more than half of the year. 1040EZ). This amount may be reported inIncome Must Be Less box 11 of your Form W-2. If you receivedIf you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
Than: such an amount but box 11 is blank, con-are a qualifying child of another person, you
tact your employer for the amount re-cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the
ceived as a pension or annuity.person for whom you are a qualifying child does• $35,263 ($37,263 for married filing jointly)
not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claimif you have more than one qualifying child,Clergy. If you are a member of the clergythe EIC. Put “No” next to line 66a (Form 1040),• $31,030 ($33,030 for married filing jointly)who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2line 41a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (Form if you have one qualifying child, or of that schedule includes an amount that was1040EZ).
also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtract• $11,750 ($13,750 for married filing jointly)that amount from the amount on line 7 (FormExample. You lived with your mother all if you do not have a qualifying child.1040) and enter the result in the first space ofyear. You are age 26 and permanently and to-
the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040 in-tally disabled. Your only income was from aEarned income generally means wages, sala-
structions for lines 66a and 66b. Put “Clergy” oncommunity center where you went three days aries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net
the dotted line next to line 66a (Form 1040).week to answer telephones. You earned $3,400earnings from self-employment. Employee pay
for the year and provided more than half of youris earned income only if it is taxable. NontaxableChurch employees.  A church employeeown support. Because you meet the relation-employee pay, such as certain dependent caremeans an employee (other than a minister orship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-benefits and adoption benefits, is not earnedmember of a religious order) of a church oring child of your mother for the EIC. She canincome. But there is an exception for nontaxablequalified church-controlled organization that isclaim the EIC if she meets all the other require-combat pay, which you can choose to include inexempt from employer social security and Medi-ments. Because you are a qualifying child ofearned income. Earned income is explained incare taxes. If you received wages as a churchyour mother, you cannot claim the EIC. This isdetail in Rule 7. employee and included any amount on both lineso even if your mother cannot or does not claim 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040),Figuring earned income.If you are self-em-the EIC. subtract that amount from the amount on line 7ployed, a statutory employee, or a member of(Form 1040) and enter the result in the firstthe clergy or church employee who files Sched-space of the worksheet in Step 5 of the FormRule 14. You Must Have ule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your earned1040 instructions for lines 66a and 66b.income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC Work-Lived in the United States
sheet B in the Form 1040 instructions.More Than Half of the Year IRS Will FigureOtherwise, figure your earned income by us-
ing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040Your home (and your spouse’s, if filing a joint the EIC for Youinstructions for lines 66a and 66b or the Formreturn) must have been in the United States for1040A instructions for lines 41a and 41b, or theThe IRS will figure the amount of your EIC formore than half the year. worksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-you if you follow the steps explained in thisIf it was not, put “No” next to line 66a (Formtions for lines 8a and 8b. section.1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or line 8a (FormWhen using one of those worksheets to fig-1040EZ). Please do not ask the IRS to figureure your earned income, you will start with the
your EIC unless you are eligible for it.amount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) orUnited States.This means the 50 states and Read the rules in Parts A, B, C, and DCAUTION
!
line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce thatthe District of Columbia. It does not include to see if you qualify.amount by any amount included on that line andPuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.described in the following list. If you want the IRS to also figure the
amount of your income tax, see chap-• Scholarship or fellowship grants not re-Homeless shelter. Your home can be any ter 30.
TIP
ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship orlocation where you regularly live. You do notfellowship grant that was not reported toneed a traditional home. If you lived in one oryou on a Form W-2 is not consideredmore homeless shelters in the United States forearned income for the earned incomemore than half the year, you meet this rule. Form 1040credit.
Military personnel stationed outside the • Inmates. Amounts received for work per-If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figure
United States. U.S. military personnel sta- formed while an inmate in a penal institu-your credit for you, follow these steps.
tioned outside the United States on extended tion are not earned income for the earned
active duty (defined in Rule 8) are considered to income credit. This includes amounts re- 1. Put “EIC” on the dotted line next to line
live in the United States during that duty period ceived for work performed while in a work 66a. Then, if you have any of the types of
for purposes of the EIC. release program or while in a halfway income described earlier under Inmates,
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 239

Page 242 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deferred compensation plans, or Clergy, using (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 3. Enter the amount of your earned income
follow the instructions given there. 1040EZ). credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a.2. If you received nontaxable combat pay andForm 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you fileare electing to include it in your earned 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,income for the EIC, enter the amount on Do not attach it to your income tax return.follow these steps.line 66b (Form 1040). For details, see
Nontaxable combat pay election in Rule 7. 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
3. Complete all other parts of your return thatturn to the instructions for lines 66a and
apply to you (including line 61), but do not66b, and look for Worksheet A or Work-Examplesfill in lines 71, 72, 73a, and 75. If you dosheet B.
not have a qualifying child, stop here. The following two comprehensive examples2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies
4. If you have a qualifying child, complete (complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful.to your situation according to its instruc-
Schedule EIC according to its instructions.tions. Complete Worksheet B if you were
Be sure to enter the child’s social security 1. John and Janet Smith, a married coupleself-employed, a member of the clergy or a
number on line 2 of that schedule. If you with one qualifying child and using Formchurch employee who files Schedule SE,
do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- 1040A.or a statutory employee filing Schedule C
allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- or C-EZ. Find the amount of your credit in2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with noturn. the EIC Table in your instruction booklet.qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.
3. Enter the amount of your earned income
credit from Worksheet A or B on Form Example 1. John and JanetForm 1040A 1040, line 66a.
Smith (Form 1040A)If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
your credit for you, follow these steps. Do not attach it to your income tax return.John and Janet Smith are married and will file aIf you do not have a qualifying child, stopjoint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 31. Put “EIC” to the left of the entry space forhere. years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allline 41a. Then, if you have any of the types
5. If you have a qualifying child, completeof 2005. John worked and earned $9,500. Janetof income described earlier under Inmates
Schedule EIC according to its instructions.worked part of the year and earned $1,500.or Deferred compensation plans, follow the
Be sure to enter the child’s social securityTheir earned income and AGI are $11,000. Johninstructions given there.
number on line 2 of that schedule. If youand Janet qualify for the earned income credit2. If you received nontaxable combat pay anddo not, your credit may be reduced or dis-and fill out the EIC Worksheet and Scheduleare electing to include it in your earnedallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC toincome for the EIC, enter the amount on turn. Form 1040A when they send their completedline 41b (Form 1040A). For details, see return to the IRS.Nontaxable combat pay election in Rule 7. They took the following steps to completeForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file3. Complete all other parts of your return that Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.Form 1040A and want to figure the credit your-apply to you (including line 37), but do notself, follow these steps.fill in lines 43, 44, 45a, and 47. If you do
not have a qualifying child, stop here. Completing Schedule EIC1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
4. If you have a qualifying child, completeturn to the instructions for lines 41a andThe Smiths complete Schedule EIC becauseSchedule EIC according to its instructions.41b, and look for the EIC Worksheet. they have a qualifying child. They enter “JohnBe sure to enter the child’s social security and Janet Smith” and John’s SSN (the SSN that2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according tonumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line atits instructions. Find the amount of yourdo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then fill outcredit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- Qualifying Child Information (lines 1–6).tion booklet.turn.
Line 1. The Smiths enter Amy’s first name3. Enter the amount of your earned income
and last name in the column “Child 1.”credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on
Form 1040A, line 41a. Line 2. They enter Amy’s SSN.Form 1040EZ
4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Line 3. They enter Amy’s year of birthIf you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS to Do not attach it to your income tax return.(2002).figure your credit for you, follow these steps.If you do not have a qualifying child, stop
Lines 4a and 4b.The Smiths skip lines 4ahere.1. Put “EIC” in the space to the left of line 8a. and 4b because Amy was born after 1986.Then if you have any of the types of in-5. If you have a qualifying child, complete
Line 5. The Smiths enter “Daughter.” Thiscome described earlier under Inmates or Schedule EIC according to its instructions.
line shows Amy’s relationship to John and Ja-Deferred compensation plans, follow the Be sure to enter the child’s social security
net.instructions given there. number on line 2 of that schedule. If you
do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-Line 6. The Smiths enter “12.” This is how2. If you received nontaxable combat pay andallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-many months Amy lived with them in 2005.are electing to include it in your earnedturn.income for the EIC, enter the amount on
line 8b (Form 1040EZ). For details, see
Completing the EIC WorksheetNontaxable combat pay election in Rule 7. Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you file
Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-3. Complete all other parts of your return that Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-self, follow these steps.apply to you, but do not fill in lines 9, 11a, sheet to figure their earned income credit.
or 12. 1. Go to your form instruction booklet andLine 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their
turn to the instructions for lines 8a and 8bearned income).
and look for the EIC Worksheet.How To Figure the Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned Income
2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according toCredit Table in the Form 1040A instructions.EIC Yourself
its instructions. Find the amount of yourThe Smiths find their income of $11,000 within
credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-the range of $11,000 to $11,050. They followTo figure the EIC yourself use the EIC Work-
tion booklet. this line across to the column that describes theirsheet in the instructions for the form you are
Page 240 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 243 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
filing status and number of children and find can choose to get payments of the EIC in your If you receive advance payments of EIC in
$2,662. They enter $2,662 on line 2. paycheck now instead of waiting to get your EIC 2006, you must file a 2006 tax return (even if you
all at once in 2007 when you file your tax return would not otherwise have to file) to report theLine 3. The Smiths enter their AGI of for the year 2006. These payments are called payments and claim any additional EIC. Box 9 of$11,000. advance EIC payments. This chapter explains your Form W-2 will show the amount you re-
Line 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” box how you may be able to get them this year and ceived. See the instructions for Form 1040 or
because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).how to report them on your tax return. Form 1040A for the line number on which you
They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2 report advance payments of EIC.Who can get the advance payment of the($2,662) on line 6. earned income credit? To get part of the Receipt of advance payments you do not
Line 6. The Smiths’ EIC is $2,662. earned income credit paid to you throughout thequalify for.If you receive advance payments
year in your paycheck, you must meet all the of EIC in 2006, and later find out that you are not
following rules. eligible for some or all of them, you still must
Example 2. Kelly Green report them on your tax return.
1. You must expect that your earned income(Form 1040EZ) You cannot use Form 1040EZ to re-and AGI will each be less than $32,001
port your advance payments. You($34,001 if you expect to file married filingKelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student.
must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A.CAUTION
!
jointly).She lived with her parents in the United States
for all of 2005. She had a part-time job and2. You must expect to have a qualifying child.earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a When to give your employer a new Form W-5.
3. You must expect to meet all the rules insavings account. She is not eligible to be The 2006 Form W-5 you give to your employer is
Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in theclaimed as a dependent on her parents’ return. valid until December 31, 2006. If you expect to
instructions for Form W-5.Although she lived with her parents, she is not be eligible for EIC in 2007 and you want to
their qualifying child because she does not meet receive advance payments, you must give your
Persons who are not entitled to receive ad-the age test. She does not have any children. employer a new Form W-5 in 2007. Do this each
vance payments.  Under certain circum-Kelly qualifies for the earned income credit. year you expect to be eligible for the EIC.
stances, even if you meet these rules, you mayKelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete the If you no longer want to get advance pay-
not be entitled to get EIC. If your wages are notEIC Worksheet. ments or if your situation changes and you no
subject to federal income tax, social security tax,longer qualify for the earned income credit, you
or Medicare tax withholding, you cannot get themust give your employer a new Form W-5.
advance payment of the earned income credit. IfCompleting the EIC Worksheet Check the “No” box on line 1 of the new form.
you are a farm worker paid on a daily basis, yourIf your spouse files a Form W-5 with his orKelly figures the amount of her earned incomeemployer is not required to pay you the advanceher employer, you must file a new Form W-5credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows. amount of the credit. with your employer. Check the “Yes” box on line
3.Line 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in-
come). How To Get Advance
Advance PaymentsLine 2. Kelly goes to the Earned IncomePayments for 2006
Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet. Received in 2005If you meet the rules stated above under WhoShe finds her earned income of $6,240 in the
can get the advance payment of the earnedrange of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line If you received advance payments of EIC in
income credit, give your employer a Form W-5,across to the column that describes her filing 2005, you must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to
Earned Income Credit Advance Payment Certifi-status and number of children and finds $399. report the payments. Your Form W-2, box 9, will
cate, for 2006.She enters $399 on line 2. show the amount you received. Report the
After you have read the instructions andamount on line 61 (Form 1040) or line 37 (FormLine 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI). completed Form W-5, give the lower part of the1040A).
form to your employer. Keep the top part for yourLine 4. Kelly checks the “No” box because
You cannot use Form 1040EZ to re-records.lines 1 and 3 are not the same.
port your advance payments.
More than one employer. If you have moreLine 5. Kelly checks the “Yes” box because CAUTION
!
than one employer, give a certificate to only onethe amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than
of them. If you are married and both you and$6,550. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the
your spouse are employed and expect to qualifyamount from line 2, $399, on line 6.
for the credit, you may give a Form W-5 to yourLine 6. She enters $399 here and on Formemployer and your spouse may give one to his1040EZ, line 8a. Kelly’s earned income credit isor her employer.$399.
Advance Earned
Income Credit
Do you expect to be eligible for the EIC this year
(2006) and to have a qualifying child? If so, you
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 241

Page 244 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Janet Smith 2222 00222
00000 2224
2002
12
Amy Smith
/H17076
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2005Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 41a and 41b, or Form 1040, lines 66a and
66b, to make sure that (a) you can take the EIC and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
4
2
5
6
1 Child’s name
Child’s SSN
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2005
months
Yes.
months
If the child was born before 1987—
Was the child permanently and totally
disabled during any part of 2005?
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 44
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 48 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2005. If your child was born and died in 2005
and did not have an SSN, enter “Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate.
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue Continue
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue ContinueThe child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2005 but less than 7 months, enter “7.”
● If the child was born or died in 2005 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2005, enter “12.”
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
You may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2005, and
(b) is a U.S. citizen or resident alien. For more details, see the instructions for line 42 of Form 1040A or line 68 of
Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.)
Was the child under age 24 at the end
of 2005 and a student?
a
Child’s year of birth
If born after 1986, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
If born after 1986, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year3
CAUTION
TIP
2005
Daughter
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 245 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
11,000
2,662
11,000
2,662
EIC Worksheet _ line 41 Cat. 12088U07
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 41a and 41b
1040A
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1
Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 43. But if you elect to use your 2004 earned
income (see page 43), enter that amount instead.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on pages 46–52
to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
If you have:
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 46–52 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 41a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
Put “No” to the left of the entry space for line 41a.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $6,550 ($8,550
if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $14,400
($16,400 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit. If you elect to use your
2004 earned income (see page 43), enter “PYEI” and the amount
of your earned income on the line next to line 41a.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 44 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2005.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 243

Page 246 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6,240
6,260
399
399
EIC Worksheet Cat.12063Z05
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 8a and 8b
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $6,550 ($8,550 if married filing jointly)?
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 17
to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your
filing status. Enter the credit here.
3
Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income
Credit
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
Enter “No” in the space to the left of line 8a.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed,
see page 15 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2005.
CAUTION
1040EZ
1
Enter your earned income from Step 2 that begins
on page 14. But if you elect to use your 2004
earned income (see page 15), enter that amount
instead.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 17 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 8a.
6
2
This is your earned income credit. If you elect to use your 2004
earned income (see page 15), enter “PYEI” and the amount of your
2004 earned income in the space to the left of line 8a.
/H17076
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit

Page 247 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist
You may claim the EIC if you answer “Yes” to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: ❏❏
• $11,750 ($13,750 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $31,030 ($33,030 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $35,263 ($37,263 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) ❏❏
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? (See❏❏
Rule 3.)
Caution: If you are a nonresident alien, answer “Yes” only if your filing status is married filing
jointly and you are married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien. (See Rule 4.)
4. Answer “Yes” if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer “No.” (See ❏❏
Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $2,700 or less? (See Rule 6.) ❏❏
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: ❏❏
• $11,750 ($13,750 if married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $31,030 ($33,030 if married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child, or
• $35,263 ($37,263 if married filing jointly) if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer “Yes” if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another❏❏
person. Otherwise, answer “No.” (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10–12. If you
do not have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10–12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? (See Rule ❏❏
8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer “Yes” if your qualifying child also meets the❏❏
tests to be a qualifying child of another person, but the other person is not claiming any
child-related tax benefits using that child. Answer “No” if you do not know whether the other
person is claiming any child-related tax benefits using that child.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2005?❏❏
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer “Yes” if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent❏❏
on anyone else’s return. Answer “No” if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be
claimed as a dependent on someone else’s return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse’s if filing a joint return) in the United States for more❏❏
than half the year? (See Rule 14.)
*PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the
EIC. Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form
1040EZ. If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 8 and “No” to question 9, see Rule 9 to help you
determine whether you can claim the EIC. If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7 and “No” to
question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if you can claim the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered “Yes” to questions 1 through 7, and 10
through 12, you can claim the EIC.
If you answered “No” to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit Page 245

Page 248 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adoption Credit• Child and dependent care credit (chapter
32).
You may be able to take a tax credit of up to37. • Credit for the elderly or the disabled$10,630 for qualifying expenses paid to adopt
(chapter 33). an eligible child. The credit may be allowed for
the adoption of a child with special needs even if• Child tax credit (chapter 34).
you do not have any qualifying expenses.Other Credits • Education credits (chapter 35). If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)
• Earned income credit (chapter 36). is more than $159,450, your credit is reduced. If
your modified AGI is $199,450 or more, you
What’s New for 2005 cannot take the credit.Nonrefundable credits.The first part of this
chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers sixAdoption credit. The maximum adoption Qualifying expenses.Qualifying adoption ex-credits that you subtract from your tax. Thesecredit increases to $10,630. See Adoption penses are reasonable and necessary ex-credits may reduce your tax to zero. If theseCredit, for more information. penses directly related to, and whose principalcredits are more than your tax, the excess is notpurpose is for, the legal adoption of an eligibleExcess withholding of social security taxrefunded to you. child. These expenses include:and railroad retirement tax.Social security
and tier 1 railroad retirement tax (RRTA) are • Adoption fees,Refundable credits.The second part of thisboth withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. The
chapter, Refundable Credits, covers three cred- • Court costs,maximum wages subject to this tax increased to
its that are treated as payments and are refund-$90,000 in 2005. The withholding rate of tier 2 • Attorney fees,able to you. These credits are added to theRRTA decreased to 4.4% of wages in 2005. The
• Traveling expenses (including amountsfederal income tax withheld and any estimatedmaximum wages subject to this tax increased to
spent for meals and lodging) while away$66,900 in 2005. If you had too much socialtax payments you made. If this total is more than
from home, andsecurity or RRTA tax withheld during 2005, youyour total tax, the excess will be refunded to you.
may be entitled to a credit of the excess with- • Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreign
holding. For more information about the credit, child.Useful Itemssee Credit for Excess Social Security Tax or
You may want to see: .Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under Re-
fundable Credits, later. Nonqualifying expenses.Qualifying adop-Publication tion expenses do not include expenses:
❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses
• That violate state or federal law,
❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for
What’s New for 2006 • For carrying out any surrogate parentingIndividuals
arrangement,
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-TimeResidential energy credit.You may be able • For the adoption of your spouse’s child,Homeownersto take a residential energy credit for expenses
• For which you received funds under anypaid in 2006 to have qualified energy saving❏ 535 Business Expenses
federal, state, or local program,items installed in your main home. See Publica-❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementstion 553 for more information. • Allowed as a credit or deduction under any(IRAs) other federal income tax rule, orAlternative motor vehicle credit.You may
Form (and Instructions)be able to take a credit if you place an energy • Paid or reimbursed by your employer or
efficient motor vehicle or alternative fuel vehicle any other person or organization.❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,refueling property in service in 2006. See Publi- Estate, or Trust)cation 553 for more information. Eligible child.The term “eligible child” means❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder of any individual:Qualified electric vehicle credit.The quali- Undistributed Long-Term Capitalfied electric vehicle credit is reduced by 75% forGains • Under 18 years old, orqualified vehicles placed in service in 2006.
❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit • Physically or mentally incapable of caring
for himself or herself.❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax
— Individuals, Estates, and TrustsChild with special needs.An eligible childIntroduction ❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage is a child with special needs if all three of the
This chapter discusses the following credits. Subsidy following apply.
• Adoption credit. ❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit1. He or she is a citizen or resident of the
• Foreign tax credit. ❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses United States (including U.S. posses-
sions).• Mortgage interest credit. ❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement
2. A state (including the District of Columbia)Savings Contributions• Retirement savings contributions credit. determines that the child cannot or should❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit• Credit for prior year minimum tax. not be returned to his or her parents’
home.• Qualified electric vehicle credit.
3. The state has determined that the child will• Credit for excess social security tax or rail- not be adopted unless assistance is pro-road retirement tax withheld. vided to the adoptive parents. FactorsNonrefundable Credits• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. used by the state to make this determina-
tion include:The credits discussed in this part of the chapter• Health coverage tax credit.
can reduce your tax. However, if the total ofa. The child’s ethnic background,these credits is more than your tax, the excess isSeveral other credits are discussed in other
b. The child’s age,not refunded to you.chapters in this publication.
Page 246 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 249 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Whether the child is a member of a mi- 4. The total of your foreign taxes was not to include any credit carryforward from 2002,
nority or sibling group, or more than $300 (not more than $600 if2003, and 2004.
married filing jointly). Include the credit in your total for Form 1040,d. Whether the child has a medical condi-
line 54, and check box a.tion or physical, mental, or emotional5. All of your foreign taxes were:
handicap.
a. Legally owed and not eligible for a re-Reduced home mortgage interest deduction.
fund, and If you itemize your deductions on Schedule AWhen to take the credit.Generally, until the (Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort-b. Paid to countries that are recognized byadoption becomes final, you take the credit in gage interest deduction by the amount of thethe United States and do not supportthe year after your qualified expenses are paid mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396,terrorism.or incurred. See the instructions for Form 8839 line 3. You must do this even if part of thatfor more specific information on when to take the amount is to be carried forward to 2006. ForFor more details on these requirements, seecredit. more information about the home mortgage in-the instructions for Form 1116.
Foreign child.If the child is not a U.S. citi- terest deduction, see chapter 23.
zen or resident at the time the adoption process
Mortgage Interest Creditbegan, you cannot take the credit unless the Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy.If
adoption becomes final. You treat all adoption you received an MCC with your mortgage loan,The mortgage interest credit is intended to helpexpenses paid or incurred in years before the you may have to recapture (pay back) all or partlower-income individuals own a home. If youadoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the of the benefit you received from that program.qualify, you can take the credit each year for partyear it becomes final. The recapture may be required if you sell orof the home mortgage interest you pay.
dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9How to take the credit.To take the credit, you
years after the date you closed your mortgagemust complete Form 8839 and attach it to yourWho qualifies. You may be eligible for the
loan. See Publication 523, Selling Your Home,Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Enter the credit oncredit if you were issued a mortgage credit certif-
for more information.Form 1040, line 53, or Form 1040A, line 34.icate (MCC)  from your state or local govern-
ment. Generally, an MCC is issued only in
connection with a new mortgage for the
Retirement SavingsForeign Tax Credit
purchase of your main home. Contributions CreditYou generally can choose to take income taxes
you paid or accrued during the year to a foreignAmount of credit.Figure your credit on FormYou may be able to take this credit if you, or yourcountry or U.S. possession as a credit against8396. If your mortgage is equal to (or smallerspouse if filing jointly, made:your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct themthan) the certified indebtedness amount (loan)
as an itemized deduction (see chapter 22).shown on your MCC, enter on Form 8396, line 1,• Contributions to a traditional or Roth IRA,
You cannot take a credit (or deduction) forall the interest you paid on your mortgage during• Elective deferrals to a 401(k), 403(b), gov-foreign income taxes paid on income that youthe year. ernmental 457, SEP, or SIMPLE plan,exclude from U.S. tax under any of the following.If your mortgage loan amount is larger than
• Voluntary employee contributions to athe certified indebtedness amount shown on1. Foreign earned income exclusion. qualified retirement plan (including the fed-your MCC, you can figure the credit on only part
eral Thrift Savings Plan), or2. Foreign housing exclusion. of the interest you paid. To find the amount to
enter on line 1, multiply the total interest you• Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan.3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from paid during the year on your mortgage by theU.S. tax. following fraction. However, you cannot take the credit if either of4. Possession exclusion. the following applies.
5. Extraterritorial income exclusion. Certified indebtedness 1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, oramount on your MCC Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $25,000Limit on the credit.Unless you can elect not
($37,500 if head of household; $50,000 ifOriginal amount of yourto file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), your
mortgage married filing jointly).foreign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S.
tax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by a 2. The person(s) who made the qualified con-If two or more persons (other than a marriedfraction. The numerator of the fraction is your tribution or elective deferral (a) was borncouple filing a joint return) hold an interest in thetaxable income from sources outside the United after January 1, 1988, (b) is claimed as ahome to which the MCC relates, the credit mustStates. The denominator is your total taxable dependent on someone else’s 2005 tax re-be divided based on the interest held by eachincome from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub-person. See Publication 530 for more informa- turn or (c) was a student (defined next).lication 514 for more information. tion.
How to take the credit.Complete Form 1116 If the certificate credit rate is moreStudent. You were a student if during any 5and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the creditthan 20%, the credit you are allowedmonths of 2005 you:on Form 1040, line 47. cannot be more than $2,000.CAUTION
!
• Were enrolled as a full-time student at aException. You do not have to complete
school, orForm 1116 to take the credit if all five of theCarryforward. If your allowable credit is re-
following apply. duced because of the limit based on your tax,• Took a full-time, on-farm training course
you can carry forward the unused portion of thegiven by a school or a state, county, or1. All of your gross foreign source incomecredit to the next 3 years or until used, which-local government agency.was from interest and dividends and all ofever comes first.that income and the foreign tax paid on it School. A school includes a technical,If you are subject to the $2,000 limit becausewere reported to you on Form 1099-INT, trade, or mechanical school. It does not includeyour certificate credit rate is more than 20%, youForm 1099-DIV, or Schedule K-1 (or sub-
an on-the-job training course, correspondencecannot carry forward any amount more thanstitute statement).
school, or internet school.$2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you must
2. If you had dividend income from shares ofdivide the credit).
stock, you held those shares for at least 16 How to take the credit.Figure the credit ondays. Form 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040,How to take the credit.Figure your 2005
line 51, or your Form 1040A, line 32, and attachcredit and any carryforward to 2006 on Form3. You are not filing Form 4563 or excluding
Form 8880 to your return.8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sureincome from sources within Puerto Rico.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 247

Page 250 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
asset, you must reduce the cost of the vehicle byUse Form 843, Claim for Refund andCredit for Prior Year any section 179 deduction before figuring the Request for Abatement, to claim a
Minimum Tax credit. See Publication 463, Travel, Entertain- refund of excess RRTA tier 2 tax. See
TIP
ment, Gift, and Car Expenses, for information onPublication 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated
The tax laws give special treatment to somethe section 179 deduction. Tax, for details.
kinds of income and allow special deductionsThe credit is limited to $4,000 for each vehi-Employer’s error.If any one employer with-and credits for some kinds of expenses. If youcle placed in service in 2005. held too much social security or RRTA tax, youbenefit from these laws, you may have to pay at
Recapture.  The credit will be subject to re- cannot take the excess as a credit against yourleast a minimum amount of tax in addition to any
capture if, within 3 years after the date you place income tax. The employer should adjust the taxother tax on these items. This is called the alter-
the vehicle in service, the vehicle is used pre- for you. If the employer does not adjust thenative minimum tax.
dominately outside the United States or is modi- overcollection, you can file a claim for refundThe special treatment of some items of in-
fied (or its use is modified) so that it is no longer using Form 843.come and expenses only allows you to postpone
eligible for the credit. You recapture the credit bypaying tax until a later year. If in prior years you Joint return.If you are filing a joint return, youadding part or all of it to your income tax for thepaid alternative minimum tax because of these cannot add the social security or RRTA tax with-year in which the recapture event occurs. Seetax postponement items, you may be able to held from your spouse’s wages to the amountPublication 535, chapter 12, for more informa-take a credit for prior year minimum tax against withheld from your wages. Figure the credit sep-tion.your current year’s regular tax. The amount of arately for you and your spouse to determine if
the credit cannot reduce your current year’s taxHow to take the credit.To take the credit, either of you has excess withholding.
below your current year’s tentative alternativecomplete Form 8834 and attach it to your FormHow to figure the credit if you did not workminimum tax. 1040. Include the credit in your total for Formfor a railroad.If you did not work for a railroadYou may be able to take a credit against your1040, line 55. Check box c, and enter “8834” onduring 2005, figure the credit as follows:regular tax if for 2004 you had: the line next to box c.
• An alternative minimum tax liability and Do not confuse this credit with the1. Add all social security tax withheldadjustments or preferences other than ex- deduction for clean-fuel vehicles (but not more than $5,580.00 for
clusion items, which is discussed in Publication 535,each employer). Enter the totalCAUTION
!
here....................chapter 12.• A minimum tax credit that you are carrying
2. Enter any uncollected socialforward to 2005, or
security tax on tips or group-term
• An unallowed nonconventional source fuel life insurance included in the total
credit or qualified electric vehicle credit. on Form 1040, line 63........Refundable Credits
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,580.00 or
less, stop here. You cannot takeHow to take the credit.Figure your 2005 The credits discussed in this part of the chapter
the credit.................credit and any carryforward to 2006 on Formare treated as payments of tax. If the total of
8801, and attach it to your Form 1040. Includethese credits, withheld federal income tax, and4. Social security tax limit........ 5,580.00
the credit in your total for Form 1040, line 55,estimated tax payments is more than your total5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.and check box b. You can carry forward anytax, the excess can be refunded to you. Enter the result here and on Formunused credit for prior year minimum tax to later 1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line
years until it is completely used. 4 3 ) ....................Credit for Excess SocialFor more information about the credit, see
the instructions for Form 8801. Security Tax or Railroad Example. You are married and file a joint
Retirement Tax Withheld return with your spouse who had no gross in-
Qualified Electric Vehicle come in 2005. During 2005, you worked for the
Most employers must withhold social securityBrown Shoe Company and earned $52,000 inCredit tax from your wages. If you work for a railroadwages. Social security tax of $3,224 was with-
employer, that employer must withhold tier 1held. You also worked for another employer inYou may be allowed a tax credit if you placed arailroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA2005 and earned $40,200 in wages. $2,492.40qualified electric vehicle in service during thetax. of social security tax was withheld from theseyear. If you worked for two or more employers inwages. Because you worked for more than one
Qualified electric vehicle.Generally, this is a2005, you may have had too much social secur-employer and your total wages were more than
vehicle that: ity or RRTA tax withheld from your pay. You can$90,000, you can take a credit of $136.40 for the
claim the excess social security or RRTA tier 1excess social security tax withheld.• Has at least four wheels and is manufac-tax as a credit against your income tax. Thetured primarily for use on public streets,following table shows the maximum amount ofroads, and highways, 1. Add all social security tax withheldwages subject to tax and the maximum amount(but not more than $5,580.00 for• Is powered primarily by an electric motorof tax that should have been withheld in 2005.each employer). Enter the total
drawing current from rechargeable batter- here.................... $5,716.40Maximum taxies, fuel cells, or other portable sources of Maximum that should 2. Enter any uncollected socialelectrical current, wages have been security tax on tips or group-term
Type of tax subject to tax withheld life insurance included in the total• Is originally used by you,
on Form 1040, line 63........ - 0 -Social security• Is acquired for your own use, not for re-or 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,580.00 orsale, RRTA tier 1 $90,000 $5,580.00 less, stop here. You cannot take the
credit................... 5,716.40• Has never been used as a nonelectric ve-RRTA tier 2 $66,900 $2,943.60
hicle, and 4. Social security tax limit........ 5,580.00
All wages are subject to Medicare tax• Is used predominately in the United 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.withholding.States. Enter the result here and on FormCAUTION
!
1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line
4 3 ) .................... $136.40
Amount of credit. If you placed a qualified
electric vehicle in service during 2005, the credit
is generally 10% of the cost of the vehicle. How-
ever, if the vehicle is a depreciable business
Page 248 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 251 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to figure the credit if you worked for aCorporation (PBGC) pension recipient (de- which you were entitled (or would be enti-
railroad.If you were a railroad employee dur-fined later). tled if you applied).
ing 2005, figure the credit as follows: • You were covered by a qualified health Example. You received a trade adjustmentinsurance plan for which you paid the pre-allowance for January 2005. You were an eligi-1. Add all social security and tier 1 miums. ble TAA recipient on the first day of January andRRTA tax withheld (but not more
than $5,580.00 for each employer). • You were not entitled to Medicare Part AFebruary.
Enter the total here.......... or enrolled in Medicare Part B.
2. Enter any uncollected social • You were not enrolled in Medicaid or Statesecurity and tier 1 RRTA tax on Alternative TAA RecipientChildren’s Health Insurance Programtips or group-term life insurance (SCHIP).included in the total on Form 1040, You were an eligible alternative TAA recipient
line 63.................. on the first day of the month if, for that month or• You were not enrolled in the Federal Em-
the prior month, you received benefits under anployees Health Benefits Program or eligi-3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $5,580.00 or
less, stop here. You cannot take alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-ble to receive benefits under the U.S.
the credit................. gram for older workers established by the De-military health system (TRICARE).
partment of Labor.4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA • You were not imprisoned under federal,tax limit.................. 5,580.00 state, or local authority. Example. You received benefits under an
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3. alternative trade adjustment assistance pro-But, you cannot take the credit if you can beEnter the result here and on Form gram for older workers for October 2005. Theclaimed as a dependent on someone else’s1040, line 67 (or Form 1040A, line program was established by the Department of2005 tax return. If you meet all of these condi-4 3 ) .................... Labor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re-tions, you may be able to take a credit of up tocipient on the first day of October and Novem-How to take the credit.Enter the credit on65% of the amount you paid for qualified health
ber.Form 1040, line 67, or Form 1040A, line 43.insurance coverage. The amount you paid for
qualified health insurance coverage must be re-
duced by any (a) Archer MSA and health sav-
Credit for Tax on PBGC Pension Recipientings account distributions used to pay for the
Undistributed Capital Gaincoverage, and (b) National Emergency GrantsYou were an eligible PBGC pension recipient onyou received for health insurance in 2005.the first day of the month, if both of the followingYou must include in your income any amounts
apply.You can take this credit on your tax return orthat regulated investment companies (com-
have it paid on your behalf in advance to yourmonly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-
1. You were age 55 or older on the first dayinsurance company. If the credit is paid on yourment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capital
of the month.behalf in advance, that amount will reduce thegain distributions, even if you did not actually
amount of the credit you can take on your taxreceive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a 2. You received a benefit for that month that
return.tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit was paid by the PBGC under title IV of the
for the tax since it is considered paid by you. TheFor definitions and special rules includingEmployee Retirement Income Security Actmutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439,those relating to qualified health insurance plansof 1974 (ERISA).Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed and employer-sponsored health insurance
If you received a lump-sum payment from theLong-Term Capital Gains, showing the undis-plans, see Publication 502 and the instructions
PBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2)tributed capital gains and the tax paid, if any.for Form 8885.
above for any month that you would have re-Take the credit for the tax paid by entering the
amount on Form 1040, line 70, and checking ceived a PBGC benefit if you had not received
box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your the lump-sum payment.TAA Recipient
return. See Capital Gain Distributions in chapter
8 for more information on undistributed capitalYou were an eligible TAA recipient on the first
gains. day of the month if, for any day in that month orHow To Take the Credit
the prior month, you:
To take the credit, complete Form 8885 andHealth Coverage Tax • Received a trade readjustment allowance,attach it to your Form 1040. Include your credit
orCredit in the total for Form 1040, line 70, and check box
c.• Would have been entitled to receive suchYou may be able to take this credit only if, for any You must attach invoices and proof of pay-an allowance except that you had not ex-month in 2005, all of the following apply. ment for any amounts you include on Formhausted all rights to any unemployment
8885, line 2, for which you did not receive aninsurance (except additional compensa-• You were an eligible trade adjustment as-
advance payment. For details, see Publicationtion that is funded by a state and is notsistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA
reimbursed from any federal funds) to 502 or Form 8885.recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 249

Page 252 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
194
131
136
156
1,625
2005
Tax Table
If your taxable income shown on Form 1040, line 43, or
Form 1040A, line 27, is less than $100,000, you must use
the following Tax Table to figure your tax. If your taxable
income is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation
Worksheet that immediately follows the Tax Rate Schedules.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their taxable income
on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First, they find the $25,300–25,350
taxable income line. Next, they find the column for married filing jointly
and read down the column. The amount shown where the taxable income
line and filing status column meet is $3,069. This is the tax amount they
should enter on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040A, line 28.
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
(Continued on next page)
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,419
3,426
3,434
3,441
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,054
3,061
3,069
3,076
3,419
3,426
3,434
3,441
3,261
3,269
3,276
3,284
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
CAUTION
05 00 0 0
51 5 11 1 1
15 25 22 2 2
25 50 44 4 4
50 75 66 6 6
75 100 99 9 9
100 125 11 11 11 11
125 150 14 14 14 14
150 175 16 16 16 16
175 200 19 19 19 19
200 225 21 21 21 21
225 250 24 24 24 24
250 275 26 26 26 26
275 300 29 29 29 29
300 325 31 31 31 31
325 350 34 34 34 34
350 375 36 36 36 36
375 400 39 39 39 39
400 425 41 41 41 41
425 450 44 44 44 44
450 475 46 46 46 46
475 500 49 49 49 49
500 525 51 51 51 51
525 550 54 54 54 54
550 575 56 56 56 56
575 600 59 59 59 59
600 625 61 61 61 61
625 650 64 64 64 64
650 675 66 66 66 66
675 700 69 69 69 69
700 725 71 71 71 71
725 750 74 74 74 74
750 775 76 76 76 76
775 800 79 79 79 79
800 825 81 81 81 81
825 850 84 84 84 84
850 875 86 86 86 86
875 900 89 89 89 89
900 925 91 91 91 91
925 950 94 94 94 94
950 975 96 96 96 96
975 1,000 99 99 99 99
1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101
1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104
1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106
1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109
1,100 1,125 111 111 111 111
1,125 1,150 114 114 114 114
1,150 1,175 116 116 116 116
1,175 1,200 119 119 119 119
1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121
1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124
1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126
1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129
1,300 1,325 131 131 131
1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134
1,350 1,375 136 136 136
1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139
1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141
1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144
1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146
1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149
1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151
1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154
1,550 1,575 156 156 156
1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159
1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161
1,650 164 164 164 164
1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166
1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169
1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171
1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174
1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176
1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179
1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181
1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184
1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186
1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189
1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191
1,925 1,950 194 194 194
1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199
2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201
2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204
2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206
2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209
2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211
2,125 2,150 214 214 214 214
2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216
2,175 2,200 219 219 219 219
2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221
2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224
2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226
2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229
2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231
2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234
2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236
2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239
2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241
2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244
2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246
2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249
2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251
2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256
2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259
2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261
2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
2,800 2,825 281 281 281 281
2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291
2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418
4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428
4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433
4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438
4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443
4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448
4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453
4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458
4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478
4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498
Page 250

Page 253 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
618
1,113
1,484
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613
6,150 6,200 618 618 618
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728
7,300 7,350 734 733 734 733
7,350 7,400 741 738 741 738
7,400 7,450 749 743 749 743
7,450 7,500 756 748 756 748
7,500 7,550 764 753 764 753
7,550 7,600 771 758 771 758
7,600 7,650 779 763 779 763
7,650 7,700 786 768 786 768
7,700 7,750 794 773 794 773
7,750 7,800 801 778 801 778
7,800 7,850 809 783 809 783
7,850 7,900 816 788 816 788
7,900 7,950 824 793 824 793
7,950 8,000 831 798 831 798
8,000 8,050 839 803 839 803
8,050 8,100 846 808 846 808
8,100 8,150 854 813 854 813
8,150 8,200 861 818 861 818
8,200 8,250 869 823 869 823
8,250 8,300 876 828 876 828
8,300 8,350 884 833 884 833
8,350 8,400 891 838 891 838
8,400 8,450 899 843 899 843
8,450 8,500 906 848 906 848
8,500 8,550 914 853 914 853
8,550 8,600 921 858 921 858
8,600 8,650 929 863 929 863
8,650 8,700 936 868 936 868
8,700 8,750 944 873 944 873
8,750 8,800 951 878 951 878
8,800 8,850 959 883 959 883
8,850 8,900 966 888 966 888
8,900 8,950 974 893 974 893
8,950 9,000 981 898 981 898
9,000 9,050 989 903 989 903
9,050 9,100 996 908 996 908
9,100 9,150 1,004 913 1,004 913
9,150 9,200 1,011 918 1,011 918
9,200 9,250 1,019 923 1,019 923
9,250 9,300 1,026 928 1,026 928
9,300 9,350 1,034 933 1,034 933
9,350 9,400 1,041 938 1,041 938
9,400 9,450 1,049 943 1,049 943
9,450 9,500 1,056 948 1,056 948
9,500 9,550 1,064 953 1,064 953
9,550 9,600 1,071 958 1,071 958
9,600 9,650 1,079 963 1,079 963
9,650 9,700 1,086 968 1,086 968
9,700 9,750 1,094 973 1,094 973
9,750 9,800 1,101 978 1,101 978
9,800 9,850 1,109 983 1,109 983
9,850 9,900 1,116 988 1,116 988
9,900 9,950 1,124 993 1,124 993
9,950 10,000 1,131 998 1,131 998
10,000 10,050 1,139 1,003 1,139 1,003
10,050 10,100 1,146 1,008 1,146 1,008
10,100 10,150 1,154 1,013 1,154 1,013
10,150 10,200 1,161 1,018 1,161 1,018
10,200 10,250 1,169 1,023 1,169 1,023
10,250 10,300 1,176 1,028 1,176 1,028
10,300 10,350 1,184 1,033 1,184 1,033
10,350 10,400 1,191 1,038 1,191 1,038
10,400 10,450 1,199 1,043 1,199 1,043
10,450 10,500 1,206 1,048 1,206 1,049
10,500 10,550 1,214 1,053 1,214 1,056
10,550 10,600 1,221 1,058 1,221 1,064
10,600 10,650 1,229 1,063 1,229 1,071
10,650 10,700 1,236 1,068 1,236 1,079
10,700 10,750 1,244 1,073 1,244 1,086
10,750 10,800 1,251 1,078 1,251 1,094
10,800 10,850 1,259 1,083 1,259 1,101
10,850 10,900 1,266 1,088 1,266 1,109
10,900 10,950 1,274 1,093 1,274 1,116
10,950 11,000 1,281 1,098 1,281 1,124
11,000 11,050 1,289 1,103 1,289 1,131
11,050 11,100 1,296 1,108 1,296 1,139
11,100 11,150 1,304 1,304 1,146
11,150 11,200 1,311 1,118 1,311 1,154
11,200 11,250 1,319 1,123 1,319 1,161
11,250 11,300 1,326 1,128 1,326 1,169
11,300 11,350 1,334 1,133 1,334 1,176
11,350 11,400 1,341 1,138 1,341 1,184
11,400 11,450 1,349 1,143 1,349 1,191
11,450 11,500 1,356 1,148 1,356 1,199
11,500 11,550 1,364 1,153 1,364 1,206
11,550 11,600 1,371 1,158 1,371 1,214
11,600 11,650 1,379 1,163 1,379 1,221
11,650 11,700 1,386 1,168 1,386 1,229
11,700 11,750 1,394 1,173 1,394 1,236
11,750 11,800 1,401 1,178 1,401 1,244
11,800 11,850 1,409 1,183 1,409 1,251
11,850 11,900 1,416 1,188 1,416 1,259
11,900 11,950 1,424 1,193 1,424 1,266
11,950 12,000 1,431 1,198 1,431 1,274
12,000 12,050 1,439 1,203 1,439 1,281
12,050 12,100 1,446 1,208 1,446 1,289
12,100 12,150 1,454 1,213 1,454 1,296
12,150 12,200 1,461 1,218 1,461 1,304
12,200 12,250 1,469 1,223 1,469 1,311
12,250 12,300 1,476 1,228 1,476 1,319
12,300 12,350 1,484 1,233 1,326
12,350 12,400 1,491 1,238 1,491 1,334
12,400 12,450 1,499 1,243 1,499 1,341
12,450 12,500 1,506 1,248 1,506 1,349
12,500 12,550 1,514 1,253 1,514 1,356
12,550 12,600 1,521 1,258 1,521 1,364
12,600 12,650 1,529 1,263 1,529 1,371
12,650 12,700 1,536 1,268 1,536 1,379
12,700 12,750 1,544 1,273 1,544 1,386
12,750 12,800 1,551 1,278 1,551 1,394
12,800 12,850 1,559 1,283 1,559 1,401
12,850 12,900 1,566 1,288 1,566 1,409
12,900 12,950 1,574 1,293 1,574 1,416
12,950 13,000 1,581 1,298 1,581 1,424
13,000 13,050 1,589 1,303 1,589 1,431
13,050 13,100 1,596 1,308 1,596 1,439
13,100 13,150 1,604 1,313 1,604 1,446
13,150 13,200 1,611 1,318 1,611 1,454
13,200 13,250 1,619 1,323 1,619 1,461
13,250 13,300 1,626 1,328 1,626 1,469
13,300 13,350 1,634 1,333 1,634 1,476
13,350 13,400 1,641 1,338 1,641 1,484
13,400 13,450 1,649 1,343 1,649 1,491
13,450 13,500 1,656 1,348 1,656 1,499
13,500 13,550 1,664 1,353 1,664 1,506
13,550 13,600 1,671 1,358 1,671 1,514
13,600 13,650 1,679 1,363 1,679 1,521
13,650 13,700 1,686 1,368 1,686 1,529
13,700 13,750 1,694 1,373 1,694 1,536
13,750 13,800 1,701 1,378 1,701 1,544
13,800 13,850 1,709 1,383 1,709 1,551
13,850 13,900 1,716 1,388 1,716 1,559
13,900 13,950 1,724 1,393 1,724 1,566
13,950 14,000 1,731 1,398 1,731 1,574
Page 251

Page 254 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
14,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
18,000
19,000
20,000
21,000
22,000
14,000 14,050 1,739 1,403 1,739 1,581
14,050 14,100 1,746 1,408 1,746 1,589
14,100 14,150 1,754 1,413 1,754 1,596
14,150 14,200 1,761 1,418 1,761 1,604
14,200 14,250 1,769 1,423 1,769 1,611
14,250 14,300 1,776 1,428 1,776 1,619
14,300 14,350 1,784 1,433 1,784 1,626
14,350 14,400 1,791 1,438 1,791 1,634
14,400 14,450 1,799 1,443 1,799 1,641
14,450 14,500 1,806 1,448 1,806 1,649
14,500 14,550 1,814 1,453 1,814 1,656
14,550 14,600 1,821 1,458 1,821 1,664
14,600 14,650 1,829 1,464 1,829 1,671
14,650 14,700 1,836 1,471 1,836 1,679
14,700 14,750 1,844 1,479 1,844 1,686
14,750 14,800 1,851 1,486 1,851 1,694
14,800 14,850 1,859 1,494 1,859 1,701
14,850 14,900 1,866 1,501 1,866 1,709
14,900 14,950 1,874 1,509 1,874 1,716
14,950 15,000 1,881 1,516 1,881 1,724
15,000 15,050 1,889 1,524 1,889 1,731
15,050 15,100 1,896 1,531 1,896 1,739
15,100 15,150 1,904 1,539 1,904 1,746
15,150 15,200 1,911 1,546 1,911 1,754
15,200 15,250 1,919 1,554 1,919 1,761
15,250 15,300 1,926 1,561 1,926 1,769
15,300 15,350 1,934 1,569 1,934 1,776
15,350 15,400 1,941 1,576 1,941 1,784
15,400 15,450 1,949 1,584 1,949 1,791
15,450 15,500 1,956 1,591 1,956 1,799
15,500 15,550 1,964 1,599 1,964 1,806
15,550 15,600 1,971 1,606 1,971 1,814
15,600 15,650 1,979 1,614 1,979 1,821
15,650 15,700 1,986 1,621 1,986 1,829
15,700 15,750 1,994 1,629 1,994 1,836
15,750 15,800 2,001 1,636 2,001 1,844
15,800 15,850 2,009 1,644 2,009 1,851
15,850 15,900 2,016 1,651 2,016 1,859
15,900 15,950 2,024 1,659 2,024 1,866
15,950 16,000 2,031 1,666 2,031 1,874
16,000 16,050 2,039 1,674 2,039 1,881
16,050 16,100 2,046 1,681 2,046 1,889
16,100 16,150 2,054 1,689 2,054 1,896
16,150 16,200 2,061 1,696 2,061 1,904
16,200 16,250 2,069 1,704 2,069 1,911
16,250 16,300 2,076 1,711 2,076 1,919
16,300 16,350 2,084 1,719 2,084 1,926
16,350 16,400 2,091 1,726 2,091 1,934
16,400 16,450 2,099 1,734 2,099 1,941
16,450 16,500 2,106 1,741 2,106 1,949
16,500 16,550 2,114 1,749 2,114 1,956
16,550 16,600 2,121 1,756 2,121 1,964
16,600 16,650 2,129 1,764 2,129 1,971
16,650 16,700 2,136 1,771 2,136 1,979
16,700 16,750 2,144 1,779 2,144 1,986
16,750 16,800 2,151 1,786 2,151 1,994
16,800 16,850 2,159 1,794 2,159 2,001
16,850 16,900 2,166 1,801 2,166 2,009
16,900 16,950 2,174 1,809 2,174 2,016
16,950 17,000 2,181 1,816 2,181 2,024
17,000 17,050 2,189 1,824 2,189 2,031
17,050 17,100 2,196 1,831 2,196 2,039
17,100 17,150 2,204 1,839 2,204 2,046
17,150 17,200 2,211 1,846 2,211 2,054
17,200 17,250 2,219 1,854 2,219 2,061
17,250 17,300 2,226 1,861 2,226 2,069
17,300 17,350 2,234 1,869 2,234 2,076
17,350 17,400 2,241 1,876 2,241 2,084
17,400 17,450 2,249 1,884 2,249 2,091
17,450 17,500 2,256 1,891 2,256 2,099
17,500 17,550 2,264 1,899 2,264 2,106
17,550 17,600 2,271 1,906 2,271 2,114
17,600 17,650 2,279 1,914 2,279 2,121
17,650 17,700 2,286 1,921 2,286 2,129
17,700 17,750 2,294 1,929 2,294 2,136
17,750 17,800 2,301 1,936 2,301 2,144
17,800 17,850 2,309 1,944 2,309 2,151
17,850 17,900 2,316 1,951 2,316 2,159
17,900 17,950 2,324 1,959 2,324 2,166
17,950 18,000 2,331 1,966 2,331 2,174
18,000 18,050 2,339 1,974 2,339 2,181
18,050 18,100 2,346 1,981 2,346 2,189
18,100 18,150 2,354 1,989 2,354 2,196
18,150 18,200 2,361 1,996 2,361 2,204
18,200 18,250 2,369 2,004 2,369 2,211
18,250 18,300 2,376 2,011 2,376 2,219
18,300 18,350 2,384 2,019 2,384 2,226
18,350 18,400 2,391 2,026 2,391 2,234
18,400 18,450 2,399 2,034 2,399 2,241
18,450 18,500 2,406 2,041 2,406 2,249
18,500 18,550 2,414 2,049 2,414 2,256
18,550 18,600 2,421 2,056 2,421 2,264
18,600 18,650 2,429 2,064 2,429 2,271
18,650 18,700 2,436 2,071 2,436 2,279
18,700 18,750 2,444 2,079 2,444 2,286
18,750 18,800 2,451 2,086 2,451 2,294
18,800 18,850 2,459 2,094 2,459 2,301
18,850 18,900 2,466 2,101 2,466 2,309
18,900 18,950 2,474 2,109 2,474 2,316
18,950 19,000 2,481 2,116 2,481 2,324
19,000 19,050 2,489 2,124 2,489 2,331
19,050 19,100 2,496 2,131 2,496 2,339
19,100 19,150 2,504 2,139 2,504 2,346
19,150 19,200 2,511 2,146 2,511 2,354
19,200 19,250 2,519 2,154 2,519 2,361
19,250 19,300 2,526 2,161 2,526 2,369
19,300 19,350 2,534 2,169 2,534 2,376
19,350 19,400 2,541 2,176 2,541 2,384
19,400 19,450 2,549 2,184 2,549 2,391
19,450 19,500 2,556 2,191 2,556 2,399
19,500 19,550 2,564 2,199 2,564 2,406
19,550 19,600 2,571 2,206 2,571 2,414
19,600 19,650 2,579 2,214 2,579 2,421
19,650 19,700 2,586 2,221 2,586 2,429
19,700 19,750 2,594 2,229 2,594 2,436
19,750 19,800 2,601 2,236 2,601 2,444
19,800 19,850 2,609 2,244 2,609 2,451
19,850 19,900 2,616 2,251 2,616 2,459
19,900 19,950 2,624 2,259 2,624 2,466
19,950 20,000 2,631 2,266 2,631 2,474
20,000 20,050 2,639 2,274 2,639 2,481
20,050 20,100 2,646 2,281 2,646 2,489
20,100 20,150 2,654 2,289 2,654 2,496
20,150 20,200 2,661 2,296 2,661 2,504
20,200 20,250 2,669 2,304 2,669 2,511
20,250 20,300 2,676 2,311 2,676 2,519
20,300 20,350 2,684 2,319 2,684 2,526
20,350 20,400 2,691 2,326 2,691 2,534
20,400 20,450 2,699 2,334 2,699 2,541
20,450 20,500 2,706 2,341 2,706 2,549
20,500 20,550 2,714 2,349 2,714 2,556
20,550 20,600 2,721 2,356 2,721 2,564
20,600 20,650 2,729 2,364 2,729 2,571
20,650 20,700 2,736 2,371 2,736 2,579
20,700 20,750 2,744 2,379 2,744 2,586
20,750 20,800 2,751 2,386 2,751 2,594
20,800 20,850 2,759 2,394 2,759 2,601
20,850 20,900 2,766 2,401 2,766 2,609
20,900 20,950 2,774 2,409 2,774 2,616
20,950 21,000 2,781 2,416 2,781 2,624
21,000 21,050 2,789 2,424 2,789 2,631
21,050 21,100 2,796 2,431 2,796 2,639
21,100 21,150 2,804 2,439 2,804 2,646
21,150 21,200 2,811 2,446 2,811 2,654
21,200 21,250 2,819 2,454 2,819 2,661
21,250 21,300 2,826 2,461 2,826 2,669
21,300 21,350 2,834 2,469 2,834 2,676
21,350 21,400 2,841 2,476 2,841 2,684
21,400 21,450 2,849 2,484 2,849 2,691
21,450 21,500 2,856 2,491 2,856 2,699
21,500 21,550 2,864 2,499 2,864 2,706
21,550 21,600 2,871 2,506 2,871 2,714
21,600 21,650 2,879 2,514 2,879 2,721
21,650 21,700 2,886 2,521 2,886 2,729
21,700 21,750 2,894 2,529 2,894 2,736
21,750 21,800 2,901 2,536 2,901 2,744
21,800 21,850 2,909 2,544 2,909 2,751
21,850 21,900 2,916 2,551 2,916 2,759
21,900 21,950 2,924 2,559 2,924 2,766
21,950 22,000 2,931 2,566 2,931 2,774
22,000 22,050 2,939 2,574 2,939 2,781
22,050 22,100 2,946 2,581 2,946 2,789
22,100 22,150 2,954 2,589 2,954 2,796
22,150 22,200 2,961 2,596 2,961 2,804
22,200 22,250 2,969 2,604 2,969 2,811
22,250 22,300 2,976 2,611 2,976 2,819
22,300 22,350 2,984 2,619 2,984 2,826
22,350 22,400 2,991 2,626 2,991 2,834
22,400 22,450 2,999 2,634 2,999 2,841
22,450 22,500 3,006 2,641 3,006 2,849
22,500 22,550 3,014 2,649 3,014 2,856
22,550 22,600 3,021 2,656 3,021 2,864
22,600 22,650 3,029 2,664 3,029 2,871
22,650 22,700 3,036 2,671 3,036 2,879
22,700 22,750 3,044 2,679 3,044 2,886
22,750 22,800 3,051 2,686 3,051 2,894
22,800 22,850 3,059 2,694 3,059 2,901
22,850 22,900 3,066 2,701 3,066 2,909
22,900 22,950 3,074 2,709 3,074 2,916
22,950 23,000 3,081 2,716 3,081 2,924
Page 252

Page 255 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
23,000 23,050 3,089 2,724 3,089 2,931
23,050 23,100 3,096 2,731 3,096 2,939
23,100 23,150 3,104 2,739 3,104 2,946
23,150 23,200 3,111 2,746 3,111 2,954
23,200 23,250 3,119 2,754 3,119 2,961
23,250 23,300 3,126 2,761 3,126 2,969
23,300 23,350 3,134 2,769 3,134 2,976
23,350 23,400 3,141 2,776 3,141 2,984
23,400 23,450 3,149 2,784 3,149 2,991
23,450 23,500 3,156 2,791 3,156 2,999
23,500 23,550 3,164 2,799 3,164 3,006
23,550 23,600 3,171 2,806 3,171 3,014
23,600 23,650 3,179 2,814 3,179 3,021
23,650 23,700 3,186 2,821 3,186 3,029
23,700 23,750 3,194 2,829 3,194 3,036
23,750 23,800 3,201 2,836 3,201 3,044
23,800 23,850 3,209 2,844 3,209 3,051
23,850 23,900 3,216 2,851 3,216 3,059
23,900 23,950 3,224 2,859 3,224 3,066
23,950 24,000 3,231 2,866 3,231 3,074
24,000 24,050 3,239 2,874 3,239 3,081
24,050 24,100 3,246 2,881 3,246 3,089
24,100 24,150 3,254 2,889 3,254 3,096
24,150 24,200 3,261 2,896 3,261 3,104
24,200 24,250 3,269 2,904 3,269 3,111
24,250 24,300 3,276 2,911 3,276 3,119
24,300 24,350 3,284 2,919 3,284 3,126
24,350 24,400 3,291 2,926 3,291 3,134
24,400 24,450 3,299 2,934 3,299 3,141
24,450 24,500 3,306 2,941 3,306 3,149
24,500 24,550 3,314 2,949 3,314 3,156
24,550 24,600 3,321 2,956 3,321 3,164
24,600 24,650 3,329 2,964 3,329 3,171
24,650 24,700 3,336 2,971 3,336 3,179
24,700 24,750 3,344 2,979 3,344 3,186
24,750 24,800 3,351 2,986 3,351 3,194
24,800 24,850 3,359 2,994 3,359 3,201
24,850 24,900 3,366 3,001 3,366 3,209
24,900 24,950 3,374 3,009 3,374 3,216
24,950 25,000 3,381 3,016 3,381 3,224
25,000 25,050 3,389 3,024 3,389 3,231
25,050 25,100 3,396 3,031 3,396 3,239
25,100 25,150 3,404 3,039 3,404 3,246
25,150 25,200 3,411 3,046 3,411 3,254
25,200 25,250 3,419 3,054 3,419 3,261
25,250 25,300 3,426 3,061 3,426 3,269
25,300 25,350 3,434 3,069 3,434 3,276
25,350 25,400 3,441 3,076 3,441 3,284
25,400 25,450 3,449 3,084 3,449 3,291
25,450 25,500 3,456 3,091 3,456 3,299
25,500 25,550 3,464 3,099 3,464 3,306
25,550 25,600 3,471 3,106 3,471 3,314
25,600 25,650 3,479 3,114 3,479 3,321
25,650 25,700 3,486 3,121 3,486 3,329
25,700 25,750 3,494 3,129 3,494 3,336
25,750 25,800 3,501 3,136 3,501 3,344
25,800 25,850 3,509 3,144 3,509 3,351
25,850 25,900 3,516 3,151 3,516 3,359
25,900 25,950 3,524 3,159 3,524 3,366
25,950 26,000 3,531 3,166 3,531 3,374
26,000 26,050 3,539 3,174 3,539 3,381
26,050 26,100 3,546 3,181 3,546 3,389
26,100 26,150 3,554 3,189 3,554 3,396
26,150 26,200 3,561 3,196 3,561 3,404
26,200 26,250 3,569 3,204 3,569 3,411
26,250 26,300 3,576 3,211 3,576 3,419
26,300 26,350 3,584 3,219 3,584 3,426
26,350 26,400 3,591 3,226 3,591 3,434
26,400 26,450 3,599 3,234 3,599 3,441
26,450 26,500 3,606 3,241 3,606 3,449
26,500 26,550 3,614 3,249 3,614 3,456
26,550 26,600 3,621 3,256 3,621 3,464
26,600 26,650 3,629 3,264 3,629 3,471
26,650 26,700 3,636 3,271 3,636 3,479
26,700 26,750 3,644 3,279 3,644 3,486
26,750 26,800 3,651 3,286 3,651 3,494
26,800 26,850 3,659 3,294 3,659 3,501
26,850 26,900 3,666 3,301 3,666 3,509
26,900 26,950 3,674 3,309 3,674 3,516
26,950 27,000 3,681 3,316 3,681 3,524
27,000 27,050 3,689 3,324 3,689 3,531
27,050 27,100 3,696 3,331 3,696 3,539
27,100 27,150 3,704 3,339 3,704 3,546
27,150 27,200 3,711 3,346 3,711 3,554
27,200 27,250 3,719 3,354 3,719 3,561
27,250 27,300 3,726 3,361 3,726 3,569
27,300 27,350 3,734 3,369 3,734 3,576
27,350 27,400 3,741 3,376 3,741 3,584
27,400 27,450 3,749 3,384 3,749 3,591
27,450 27,500 3,756 3,391 3,756 3,599
27,500 27,550 3,764 3,399 3,764 3,606
27,550 27,600 3,771 3,406 3,771 3,614
27,600 27,650 3,779 3,414 3,779 3,621
27,650 27,700 3,786 3,421 3,786 3,629
27,700 27,750 3,794 3,429 3,794 3,636
27,750 27,800 3,801 3,436 3,801 3,644
27,800 27,850 3,809 3,444 3,809 3,651
27,850 27,900 3,816 3,451 3,816 3,659
27,900 27,950 3,824 3,459 3,824 3,666
27,950 28,000 3,831 3,466 3,831 3,674
28,000 28,050 3,839 3,474 3,839 3,681
28,050 28,100 3,846 3,481 3,846 3,689
28,100 28,150 3,854 3,489 3,854 3,696
28,150 28,200 3,861 3,496 3,861 3,704
28,200 28,250 3,869 3,504 3,869 3,711
28,250 28,300 3,876 3,511 3,876 3,719
28,300 28,350 3,884 3,519 3,884 3,726
28,350 28,400 3,891 3,526 3,891 3,734
28,400 28,450 3,899 3,534 3,899 3,741
28,450 28,500 3,906 3,541 3,906 3,749
28,500 28,550 3,914 3,549 3,914 3,756
28,550 28,600 3,921 3,556 3,921 3,764
28,600 28,650 3,929 3,564 3,929 3,771
28,650 28,700 3,936 3,571 3,936 3,779
28,700 28,750 3,944 3,579 3,944 3,786
28,750 28,800 3,951 3,586 3,951 3,794
28,800 28,850 3,959 3,594 3,959 3,801
28,850 28,900 3,966 3,601 3,966 3,809
28,900 28,950 3,974 3,609 3,974 3,816
28,950 29,000 3,981 3,616 3,981 3,824
29,000 29,050 3,989 3,624 3,989 3,831
29,050 29,100 3,996 3,631 3,996 3,839
29,100 29,150 4,004 3,639 4,004 3,846
29,150 29,200 4,011 3,646 4,011 3,854
29,200 29,250 4,019 3,654 4,019 3,861
29,250 29,300 4,026 3,661 4,026 3,869
29,300 29,350 4,034 3,669 4,034 3,876
29,350 29,400 4,041 3,676 4,041 3,884
29,400 29,450 4,049 3,684 4,049 3,891
29,450 29,500 4,056 3,691 4,056 3,899
29,500 29,550 4,064 3,699 4,064 3,906
29,550 29,600 4,071 3,706 4,071 3,914
29,600 29,650 4,079 3,714 4,079 3,921
29,650 29,700 4,086 3,721 4,086 3,929
29,700 29,750 4,096 3,729 4,096 3,936
29,750 29,800 4,109 3,736 4,109 3,944
29,800 29,850 4,121 3,744 4,121 3,951
29,850 29,900 4,134 3,751 4,134 3,959
29,900 29,950 4,146 3,759 4,146 3,966
29,950 30,000 4,159 3,766 4,159 3,974
30,000 30,050 4,171 3,774 4,171 3,981
30,050 30,100 4,184 3,781 4,184 3,989
30,100 30,150 4,196 3,789 4,196 3,996
30,150 30,200 4,209 3,796 4,209 4,004
30,200 30,250 4,221 3,804 4,221 4,011
30,250 30,300 4,234 3,811 4,234 4,019
30,300 30,350 4,246 3,819 4,246 4,026
30,350 30,400 4,259 3,826 4,259 4,034
30,400 30,450 4,271 3,834 4,271 4,041
30,450 30,500 4,284 3,841 4,284 4,049
30,500 30,550 4,296 3,849 4,296 4,056
30,550 30,600 4,309 3,856 4,309 4,064
30,600 30,650 4,321 3,864 4,321 4,071
30,650 30,700 4,334 3,871 4,334 4,079
30,700 30,750 4,346 3,879 4,346 4,086
30,750 30,800 4,359 3,886 4,359 4,094
30,800 30,850 4,371 3,894 4,371 4,101
30,850 30,900 4,384 3,901 4,384 4,109
30,900 30,950 4,396 3,909 4,396 4,116
30,950 31,000 4,409 3,916 4,409 4,124
31,000 31,050 4,421 3,924 4,421 4,131
31,050 31,100 4,434 3,931 4,434 4,139
31,100 31,150 4,446 3,939 4,446 4,146
31,150 31,200 4,459 3,946 4,459 4,154
31,200 31,250 4,471 3,954 4,471 4,161
31,250 31,300 4,484 3,961 4,484 4,169
31,300 31,350 4,496 3,969 4,496 4,176
31,350 31,400 4,509 3,976 4,509 4,184
31,400 31,450 4,521 3,984 4,521 4,191
31,450 31,500 4,534 3,991 4,534 4,199
31,500 31,550 4,546 3,999 4,546 4,206
31,550 31,600 4,559 4,006 4,559 4,214
31,600 31,650 4,571 4,014 4,571 4,221
31,650 31,700 4,584 4,021 4,584 4,229
31,700 31,750 4,596 4,029 4,596 4,236
31,750 31,800 4,609 4,036 4,609 4,244
31,800 31,850 4,621 4,044 4,621 4,251
31,850 31,900 4,634 4,051 4,634 4,259
31,900 31,950 4,646 4,059 4,646 4,266
31,950 32,000 4,659 4,066 4,659 4,274
Page 253

Page 256 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
32,000 32,050 4,671 4,074 4,671 4,281
32,050 32,100 4,684 4,081 4,684 4,289
32,100 32,150 4,696 4,089 4,696 4,296
32,150 32,200 4,709 4,096 4,709 4,304
32,200 32,250 4,721 4,104 4,721 4,311
32,250 32,300 4,734 4,111 4,734 4,319
32,300 32,350 4,746 4,119 4,746 4,326
32,350 32,400 4,759 4,126 4,759 4,334
32,400 32,450 4,771 4,134 4,771 4,341
32,450 32,500 4,784 4,141 4,784 4,349
32,500 32,550 4,796 4,149 4,796 4,356
32,550 32,600 4,809 4,156 4,809 4,364
32,600 32,650 4,821 4,164 4,821 4,371
32,650 32,700 4,834 4,171 4,834 4,379
32,700 32,750 4,846 4,179 4,846 4,386
32,750 32,800 4,859 4,186 4,859 4,394
32,800 32,850 4,871 4,194 4,871 4,401
32,850 32,900 4,884 4,201 4,884 4,409
32,900 32,950 4,896 4,209 4,896 4,416
32,950 33,000 4,909 4,216 4,909 4,424
33,000 33,050 4,921 4,224 4,921 4,431
33,050 33,100 4,934 4,231 4,934 4,439
33,100 33,150 4,946 4,239 4,946 4,446
33,150 33,200 4,959 4,246 4,959 4,454
33,200 33,250 4,971 4,254 4,971 4,461
33,250 33,300 4,984 4,261 4,984 4,469
33,300 33,350 4,996 4,269 4,996 4,476
33,350 33,400 5,009 4,276 5,009 4,484
33,400 33,450 5,021 4,284 5,021 4,491
33,450 33,500 5,034 4,291 5,034 4,499
33,500 33,550 5,046 4,299 5,046 4,506
33,550 33,600 5,059 4,306 5,059 4,514
33,600 33,650 5,071 4,314 5,071 4,521
33,650 33,700 5,084 4,321 5,084 4,529
33,700 33,750 5,096 4,329 5,096 4,536
33,750 33,800 5,109 4,336 5,109 4,544
33,800 33,850 5,121 4,344 5,121 4,551
33,850 33,900 5,134 4,351 5,134 4,559
33,900 33,950 5,146 4,359 5,146 4,566
33,950 34,000 5,159 4,366 5,159 4,574
34,000 34,050 5,171 4,374 5,171 4,581
34,050 34,100 5,184 4,381 5,184 4,589
34,100 34,150 5,196 4,389 5,196 4,596
34,150 34,200 5,209 4,396 5,209 4,604
34,200 34,250 5,221 4,404 5,221 4,611
34,250 34,300 5,234 4,411 5,234 4,619
34,300 34,350 5,246 4,419 5,246 4,626
34,350 34,400 5,259 4,426 5,259 4,634
34,400 34,450 5,271 4,434 5,271 4,641
34,450 34,500 5,284 4,441 5,284 4,649
34,500 34,550 5,296 4,449 5,296 4,656
34,550 34,600 5,309 4,456 5,309 4,664
34,600 34,650 5,321 4,464 5,321 4,671
34,650 34,700 5,334 4,471 5,334 4,679
34,700 34,750 5,346 4,479 5,346 4,686
34,750 34,800 5,359 4,486 5,359 4,694
34,800 34,850 5,371 4,494 5,371 4,701
34,850 34,900 5,384 4,501 5,384 4,709
34,900 34,950 5,396 4,509 5,396 4,716
34,950 35,000 5,409 4,516 5,409 4,724
35,000 35,050 5,421 4,524 5,421 4,731
35,050 35,100 5,434 4,531 5,434 4,739
35,100 35,150 5,446 4,539 5,446 4,746
35,150 35,200 5,459 4,546 5,459 4,754
35,200 35,250 5,471 4,554 5,471 4,761
35,250 35,300 5,484 4,561 5,484 4,769
35,300 35,350 5,496 4,569 5,496 4,776
35,350 35,400 5,509 4,576 5,509 4,784
35,400 35,450 5,521 4,584 5,521 4,791
35,450 35,500 5,534 4,591 5,534 4,799
35,500 35,550 5,546 4,599 5,546 4,806
35,550 35,600 5,559 4,606 5,559 4,814
35,600 35,650 5,571 4,614 5,571 4,821
35,650 35,700 5,584 4,621 5,584 4,829
35,700 35,750 5,596 4,629 5,596 4,836
35,750 35,800 5,609 4,636 5,609 4,844
35,800 35,850 5,621 4,644 5,621 4,851
35,850 35,900 5,634 4,651 5,634 4,859
35,900 35,950 5,646 4,659 5,646 4,866
35,950 36,000 5,659 4,666 5,659 4,874
36,000 36,050 5,671 4,674 5,671 4,881
36,050 36,100 5,684 4,681 5,684 4,889
36,100 36,150 5,696 4,689 5,696 4,896
36,150 36,200 5,709 4,696 5,709 4,904
36,200 36,250 5,721 4,704 5,721 4,911
36,250 36,300 5,734 4,711 5,734 4,919
36,300 36,350 5,746 4,719 5,746 4,926
36,350 36,400 5,759 4,726 5,759 4,934
36,400 36,450 5,771 4,734 5,771 4,941
36,450 36,500 5,784 4,741 5,784 4,949
36,500 36,550 5,796 4,749 5,796 4,956
36,550 36,600 5,809 4,756 5,809 4,964
36,600 36,650 5,821 4,764 5,821 4,971
36,650 36,700 5,834 4,771 5,834 4,979
36,700 36,750 5,846 4,779 5,846 4,986
36,750 36,800 5,859 4,786 5,859 4,994
36,800 36,850 5,871 4,794 5,871 5,001
36,850 36,900 5,884 4,801 5,884 5,009
36,900 36,950 5,896 4,809 5,896 5,016
36,950 37,000 5,909 4,816 5,909 5,024
37,000 37,050 5,921 4,824 5,921 5,031
37,050 37,100 5,934 4,831 5,934 5,039
37,100 37,150 5,946 4,839 5,946 5,046
37,150 37,200 5,959 4,846 5,959 5,054
37,200 37,250 5,971 4,854 5,971 5,061
37,250 37,300 5,984 4,861 5,984 5,069
37,300 37,350 5,996 4,869 5,996 5,076
37,350 37,400 6,009 4,876 6,009 5,084
37,400 37,450 6,021 4,884 6,021 5,091
37,450 37,500 6,034 4,891 6,034 5,099
37,500 37,550 6,046 4,899 6,046 5,106
37,550 37,600 6,059 4,906 6,059 5,114
37,600 37,650 6,071 4,914 6,071 5,121
37,650 37,700 6,084 4,921 6,084 5,129
37,700 37,750 6,096 4,929 6,096 5,136
37,750 37,800 6,109 4,936 6,109 5,144
37,800 37,850 6,121 4,944 6,121 5,151
37,850 37,900 6,134 4,951 6,134 5,159
37,900 37,950 6,146 4,959 6,146 5,166
37,950 38,000 6,159 4,966 6,159 5,174
38,000 38,050 6,171 4,974 6,171 5,181
38,050 38,100 6,184 4,981 6,184 5,189
38,100 38,150 6,196 4,989 6,196 5,196
38,150 38,200 6,209 4,996 6,209 5,204
38,200 38,250 6,221 5,004 6,221 5,211
38,250 38,300 6,234 5,011 6,234 5,219
38,300 38,350 6,246 5,019 6,246 5,226
38,350 38,400 6,259 5,026 6,259 5,234
38,400 38,450 6,271 5,034 6,271 5,241
38,450 38,500 6,284 5,041 6,284 5,249
38,500 38,550 6,296 5,049 6,296 5,256
38,550 38,600 6,309 5,056 6,309 5,264
38,600 38,650 6,321 5,064 6,321 5,271
38,650 38,700 6,334 5,071 6,334 5,279
38,700 38,750 6,346 5,079 6,346 5,286
38,750 38,800 6,359 5,086 6,359 5,294
38,800 38,850 6,371 5,094 6,371 5,301
38,850 38,900 6,384 5,101 6,384 5,309
38,900 38,950 6,396 5,109 6,396 5,316
38,950 39,000 6,409 5,116 6,409 5,324
39,000 39,050 6,421 5,124 6,421 5,331
39,050 39,100 6,434 5,131 6,434 5,339
39,100 39,150 6,446 5,139 6,446 5,346
39,150 39,200 6,459 5,146 6,459 5,354
39,200 39,250 6,471 5,154 6,471 5,361
39,250 39,300 6,484 5,161 6,484 5,369
39,300 39,350 6,496 5,169 6,496 5,376
39,350 39,400 6,509 5,176 6,509 5,384
39,400 39,450 6,521 5,184 6,521 5,391
39,450 39,500 6,534 5,191 6,534 5,399
39,500 39,550 6,546 5,199 6,546 5,406
39,550 39,600 6,559 5,206 6,559 5,414
39,600 39,650 6,571 5,214 6,571 5,421
39,650 39,700 6,584 5,221 6,584 5,429
39,700 39,750 6,596 5,229 6,596 5,436
39,750 39,800 6,609 5,236 6,609 5,444
39,800 39,850 6,621 5,244 6,621 5,454
39,850 39,900 6,634 5,251 6,634 5,466
39,900 39,950 6,646 5,259 6,646 5,479
39,950 40,000 6,659 5,266 6,659 5,491
40,000 40,050 6,671 5,274 6,671 5,504
40,050 40,100 6,684 5,281 6,684 5,516
40,100 40,150 6,696 5,289 6,696 5,529
40,150 40,200 6,709 5,296 6,709 5,541
40,200 40,250 6,721 5,304 6,721 5,554
40,250 40,300 6,734 5,311 6,734 5,566
40,300 40,350 6,746 5,319 6,746 5,579
40,350 40,400 6,759 5,326 6,759 5,591
40,400 40,450 6,771 5,334 6,771 5,604
40,450 40,500 6,784 5,341 6,784 5,616
40,500 40,550 6,796 5,349 6,796 5,629
40,550 40,600 6,809 5,356 6,809 5,641
40,600 40,650 6,821 5,364 6,821 5,654
40,650 40,700 6,834 5,371 6,834 5,666
40,700 40,750 6,846 5,379 6,846 5,679
40,750 40,800 6,859 5,386 6,859 5,691
40,800 40,850 6,871 5,394 6,871 5,704
40,850 40,900 6,884 5,401 6,884 5,716
40,900 40,950 6,896 5,409 6,896 5,729
40,950 41,000 6,909 5,416 6,909 5,741
Page 254

Page 257 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
41,000 41,050 6,921 5,424 6,921 5,754
41,050 41,100 6,934 5,431 6,934 5,766
41,100 41,150 6,946 5,439 6,946 5,779
41,150 41,200 6,959 5,446 6,959 5,791
41,200 41,250 6,971 5,454 6,971 5,804
41,250 41,300 6,984 5,461 6,984 5,816
41,300 41,350 6,996 5,469 6,996 5,829
41,350 41,400 7,009 5,476 7,009 5,841
41,400 41,450 7,021 5,484 7,021 5,854
41,450 41,500 7,034 5,491 7,034 5,866
41,500 41,550 7,046 5,499 7,046 5,879
41,550 41,600 7,059 5,506 7,059 5,891
41,600 41,650 7,071 5,514 7,071 5,904
41,650 41,700 7,084 5,521 7,084 5,916
41,700 41,750 7,096 5,529 7,096 5,929
41,750 41,800 7,109 5,536 7,109 5,941
41,800 41,850 7,121 5,544 7,121 5,954
41,850 41,900 7,134 5,551 7,134 5,966
41,900 41,950 7,146 5,559 7,146 5,979
41,950 42,000 7,159 5,566 7,159 5,991
42,000 42,050 7,171 5,574 7,171 6,004
42,050 42,100 7,184 5,581 7,184 6,016
42,100 42,150 7,196 5,589 7,196 6,029
42,150 42,200 7,209 5,596 7,209 6,041
42,200 42,250 7,221 5,604 7,221 6,054
42,250 42,300 7,234 5,611 7,234 6,066
42,300 42,350 7,246 5,619 7,246 6,079
42,350 42,400 7,259 5,626 7,259 6,091
42,400 42,450 7,271 5,634 7,271 6,104
42,450 42,500 7,284 5,641 7,284 6,116
42,500 42,550 7,296 5,649 7,296 6,129
42,550 42,600 7,309 5,656 7,309 6,141
42,600 42,650 7,321 5,664 7,321 6,154
42,650 42,700 7,334 5,671 7,334 6,166
42,700 42,750 7,346 5,679 7,346 6,179
42,750 42,800 7,359 5,686 7,359 6,191
42,800 42,850 7,371 5,694 7,371 6,204
42,850 42,900 7,384 5,701 7,384 6,216
42,900 42,950 7,396 5,709 7,396 6,229
42,950 43,000 7,409 5,716 7,409 6,241
43,000 43,050 7,421 5,724 7,421 6,254
43,050 43,100 7,434 5,731 7,434 6,266
43,100 43,150 7,446 5,739 7,446 6,279
43,150 43,200 7,459 5,746 7,459 6,291
43,200 43,250 7,471 5,754 7,471 6,304
43,250 43,300 7,484 5,761 7,484 6,316
43,300 43,350 7,496 5,769 7,496 6,329
43,350 43,400 7,509 5,776 7,509 6,341
43,400 43,450 7,521 5,784 7,521 6,354
43,450 43,500 7,534 5,791 7,534 6,366
43,500 43,550 7,546 5,799 7,546 6,379
43,550 43,600 7,559 5,806 7,559 6,391
43,600 43,650 7,571 5,814 7,571 6,404
43,650 43,700 7,584 5,821 7,584 6,416
43,700 43,750 7,596 5,829 7,596 6,429
43,750 43,800 7,609 5,836 7,609 6,441
43,800 43,850 7,621 5,844 7,621 6,454
43,850 43,900 7,634 5,851 7,634 6,466
43,900 43,950 7,646 5,859 7,646 6,479
43,950 44,000 7,659 5,866 7,659 6,491
44,000 44,050 7,671 5,874 7,671 6,504
44,050 44,100 7,684 5,881 7,684 6,516
44,100 44,150 7,696 5,889 7,696 6,529
44,150 44,200 7,709 5,896 7,709 6,541
44,200 44,250 7,721 5,904 7,721 6,554
44,250 44,300 7,734 5,911 7,734 6,566
44,300 44,350 7,746 5,919 7,746 6,579
44,350 44,400 7,759 5,926 7,759 6,591
44,400 44,450 7,771 5,934 7,771 6,604
44,450 44,500 7,784 5,941 7,784 6,616
44,500 44,550 7,796 5,949 7,796 6,629
44,550 44,600 7,809 5,956 7,809 6,641
44,600 44,650 7,821 5,964 7,821 6,654
44,650 44,700 7,834 5,971 7,834 6,666
44,700 44,750 7,846 5,979 7,846 6,679
44,750 44,800 7,859 5,986 7,859 6,691
44,800 44,850 7,871 5,994 7,871 6,704
44,850 44,900 7,884 6,001 7,884 6,716
44,900 44,950 7,896 6,009 7,896 6,729
44,950 45,000 7,909 6,016 7,909 6,741
45,000 45,050 7,921 6,024 7,921 6,754
45,050 45,100 7,934 6,031 7,934 6,766
45,100 45,150 7,946 6,039 7,946 6,779
45,150 45,200 7,959 6,046 7,959 6,791
45,200 45,250 7,971 6,054 7,971 6,804
45,250 45,300 7,984 6,061 7,984 6,816
45,300 45,350 7,996 6,069 7,996 6,829
45,350 45,400 8,009 6,076 8,009 6,841
45,400 45,450 8,021 6,084 8,021 6,854
45,450 45,500 8,034 6,091 8,034 6,866
45,500 45,550 8,046 6,099 8,046 6,879
45,550 45,600 8,059 6,106 8,059 6,891
45,600 45,650 8,071 6,114 8,071 6,904
45,650 45,700 8,084 6,121 8,084 6,916
45,700 45,750 8,096 6,129 8,096 6,929
45,750 45,800 8,109 6,136 8,109 6,941
45,800 45,850 8,121 6,144 8,121 6,954
45,850 45,900 8,134 6,151 8,134 6,966
45,900 45,950 8,146 6,159 8,146 6,979
45,950 46,000 8,159 6,166 8,159 6,991
46,000 46,050 8,171 6,174 8,171 7,004
46,050 46,100 8,184 6,181 8,184 7,016
46,100 46,150 8,196 6,189 8,196 7,029
46,150 46,200 8,209 6,196 8,209 7,041
46,200 46,250 8,221 6,204 8,221 7,054
46,250 46,300 8,234 6,211 8,234 7,066
46,300 46,350 8,246 6,219 8,246 7,079
46,350 46,400 8,259 6,226 8,259 7,091
46,400 46,450 8,271 6,234 8,271 7,104
46,450 46,500 8,284 6,241 8,284 7,116
46,500 46,550 8,296 6,249 8,296 7,129
46,550 46,600 8,309 6,256 8,309 7,141
46,600 46,650 8,321 6,264 8,321 7,154
46,650 46,700 8,334 6,271 8,334 7,166
46,700 46,750 8,346 6,279 8,346 7,179
46,750 46,800 8,359 6,286 8,359 7,191
46,800 46,850 8,371 6,294 8,371 7,204
46,850 46,900 8,384 6,301 8,384 7,216
46,900 46,950 8,396 6,309 8,396 7,229
46,950 47,000 8,409 6,316 8,409 7,241
47,000 47,050 8,421 6,324 8,421 7,254
47,050 47,100 8,434 6,331 8,434 7,266
47,100 47,150 8,446 6,339 8,446 7,279
47,150 47,200 8,459 6,346 8,459 7,291
47,200 47,250 8,471 6,354 8,471 7,304
47,250 47,300 8,484 6,361 8,484 7,316
47,300 47,350 8,496 6,369 8,496 7,329
47,350 47,400 8,509 6,376 8,509 7,341
47,400 47,450 8,521 6,384 8,521 7,354
47,450 47,500 8,534 6,391 8,534 7,366
47,500 47,550 8,546 6,399 8,546 7,379
47,550 47,600 8,559 6,406 8,559 7,391
47,600 47,650 8,571 6,414 8,571 7,404
47,650 47,700 8,584 6,421 8,584 7,416
47,700 47,750 8,596 6,429 8,596 7,429
47,750 47,800 8,609 6,436 8,609 7,441
47,800 47,850 8,621 6,444 8,621 7,454
47,850 47,900 8,634 6,451 8,634 7,466
47,900 47,950 8,646 6,459 8,646 7,479
47,950 48,000 8,659 6,466 8,659 7,491
48,000 48,050 8,671 6,474 8,671 7,504
48,050 48,100 8,684 6,481 8,684 7,516
48,100 48,150 8,696 6,489 8,696 7,529
48,150 48,200 8,709 6,496 8,709 7,541
48,200 48,250 8,721 6,504 8,721 7,554
48,250 48,300 8,734 6,511 8,734 7,566
48,300 48,350 8,746 6,519 8,746 7,579
48,350 48,400 8,759 6,526 8,759 7,591
48,400 48,450 8,771 6,534 8,771 7,604
48,450 48,500 8,784 6,541 8,784 7,616
48,500 48,550 8,796 6,549 8,796 7,629
48,550 48,600 8,809 6,556 8,809 7,641
48,600 48,650 8,821 6,564 8,821 7,654
48,650 48,700 8,834 6,571 8,834 7,666
48,700 48,750 8,846 6,579 8,846 7,679
48,750 48,800 8,859 6,586 8,859 7,691
48,800 48,850 8,871 6,594 8,871 7,704
48,850 48,900 8,884 6,601 8,884 7,716
48,900 48,950 8,896 6,609 8,896 7,729
48,950 49,000 8,909 6,616 8,909 7,741
49,000 49,050 8,921 6,624 8,921 7,754
49,050 49,100 8,934 6,631 8,934 7,766
49,100 49,150 8,946 6,639 8,946 7,779
49,150 49,200 8,959 6,646 8,959 7,791
49,200 49,250 8,971 6,654 8,971 7,804
49,250 49,300 8,984 6,661 8,984 7,816
49,300 49,350 8,996 6,669 8,996 7,829
49,350 49,400 9,009 6,676 9,009 7,841
49,400 49,450 9,021 6,684 9,021 7,854
49,450 49,500 9,034 6,691 9,034 7,866
49,500 49,550 9,046 6,699 9,046 7,879
49,550 49,600 9,059 6,706 9,059 7,891
49,600 49,650 9,071 6,714 9,071 7,904
49,650 49,700 9,084 6,721 9,084 7,916
49,700 49,750 9,096 6,729 9,096 7,929
49,750 49,800 9,109 6,736 9,109 7,941
49,800 49,850 9,121 6,744 9,121 7,954
49,850 49,900 9,134 6,751 9,134 7,966
49,900 49,950 9,146 6,759 9,146 7,979
49,950 50,000 9,159 6,766 9,159 7,991
Page 255

Page 258 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
50,000 50,050 9,171 6,774 9,171 8,004
50,050 50,100 9,184 6,781 9,184 8,016
50,100 50,150 9,196 6,789 9,196 8,029
50,150 50,200 9,209 6,796 9,209 8,041
50,200 50,250 9,221 6,804 9,221 8,054
50,250 50,300 9,234 6,811 9,234 8,066
50,300 50,350 9,246 6,819 9,246 8,079
50,350 50,400 9,259 6,826 9,259 8,091
50,400 50,450 9,271 6,834 9,271 8,104
50,450 50,500 9,284 6,841 9,284 8,116
50,500 50,550 9,296 6,849 9,296 8,129
50,550 50,600 9,309 6,856 9,309 8,141
50,600 50,650 9,321 6,864 9,321 8,154
50,650 50,700 9,334 6,871 9,334 8,166
50,700 50,750 9,346 6,879 9,346 8,179
50,750 50,800 9,359 6,886 9,359 8,191
50,800 50,850 9,371 6,894 9,371 8,204
50,850 50,900 9,384 6,901 9,384 8,216
50,900 50,950 9,396 6,909 9,396 8,229
50,950 51,000 9,409 6,916 9,409 8,241
51,000 51,050 9,421 6,924 9,421 8,254
51,050 51,100 9,434 6,931 9,434 8,266
51,100 51,150 9,446 6,939 9,446 8,279
51,150 51,200 9,459 6,946 9,459 8,291
51,200 51,250 9,471 6,954 9,471 8,304
51,250 51,300 9,484 6,961 9,484 8,316
51,300 51,350 9,496 6,969 9,496 8,329
51,350 51,400 9,509 6,976 9,509 8,341
51,400 51,450 9,521 6,984 9,521 8,354
51,450 51,500 9,534 6,991 9,534 8,366
51,500 51,550 9,546 6,999 9,546 8,379
51,550 51,600 9,559 7,006 9,559 8,391
51,600 51,650 9,571 7,014 9,571 8,404
51,650 51,700 9,584 7,021 9,584 8,416
51,700 51,750 9,596 7,029 9,596 8,429
51,750 51,800 9,609 7,036 9,609 8,441
51,800 51,850 9,621 7,044 9,621 8,454
51,850 51,900 9,634 7,051 9,634 8,466
51,900 51,950 9,646 7,059 9,646 8,479
51,950 52,000 9,659 7,066 9,659 8,491
52,000 52,050 9,671 7,074 9,671 8,504
52,050 52,100 9,684 7,081 9,684 8,516
52,100 52,150 9,696 7,089 9,696 8,529
52,150 52,200 9,709 7,096 9,709 8,541
52,200 52,250 9,721 7,104 9,721 8,554
52,250 52,300 9,734 7,111 9,734 8,566
52,300 52,350 9,746 7,119 9,746 8,579
52,350 52,400 9,759 7,126 9,759 8,591
52,400 52,450 9,771 7,134 9,771 8,604
52,450 52,500 9,784 7,141 9,784 8,616
52,500 52,550 9,796 7,149 9,796 8,629
52,550 52,600 9,809 7,156 9,809 8,641
52,600 52,650 9,821 7,164 9,821 8,654
52,650 52,700 9,834 7,171 9,834 8,666
52,700 52,750 9,846 7,179 9,846 8,679
52,750 52,800 9,859 7,186 9,859 8,691
52,800 52,850 9,871 7,194 9,871 8,704
52,850 52,900 9,884 7,201 9,884 8,716
52,900 52,950 9,896 7,209 9,896 8,729
52,950 53,000 9,909 7,216 9,909 8,741
53,000 53,050 9,921 7,224 9,921 8,754
53,050 53,100 9,934 7,231 9,934 8,766
53,100 53,150 9,946 7,239 9,946 8,779
53,150 53,200 9,959 7,246 9,959 8,791
53,200 53,250 9,971 7,254 9,971 8,804
53,250 53,300 9,984 7,261 9,984 8,816
53,300 53,350 9,996 7,269 9,996 8,829
53,350 53,400 10,009 7,276 10,009 8,841
53,400 53,450 10,021 7,284 10,021 8,854
53,450 53,500 10,034 7,291 10,034 8,866
53,500 53,550 10,046 7,299 10,046 8,879
53,550 53,600 10,059 7,306 10,059 8,891
53,600 53,650 10,071 7,314 10,071 8,904
53,650 53,700 10,084 7,321 10,084 8,916
53,700 53,750 10,096 7,329 10,096 8,929
53,750 53,800 10,109 7,336 10,109 8,941
53,800 53,850 10,121 7,344 10,121 8,954
53,850 53,900 10,134 7,351 10,134 8,966
53,900 53,950 10,146 7,359 10,146 8,979
53,950 54,000 10,159 7,366 10,159 8,991
54,000 54,050 10,171 7,374 10,171 9,004
54,050 54,100 10,184 7,381 10,184 9,016
54,100 54,150 10,196 7,389 10,196 9,029
54,150 54,200 10,209 7,396 10,209 9,041
54,200 54,250 10,221 7,404 10,221 9,054
54,250 54,300 10,234 7,411 10,234 9,066
54,300 54,350 10,246 7,419 10,246 9,079
54,350 54,400 10,259 7,426 10,259 9,091
54,400 54,450 10,271 7,434 10,271 9,104
54,450 54,500 10,284 7,441 10,284 9,116
54,500 54,550 10,296 7,449 10,296 9,129
54,550 54,600 10,309 7,456 10,309 9,141
54,600 54,650 10,321 7,464 10,321 9,154
54,650 54,700 10,334 7,471 10,334 9,166
54,700 54,750 10,346 7,479 10,346 9,179
54,750 54,800 10,359 7,486 10,359 9,191
54,800 54,850 10,371 7,494 10,371 9,204
54,850 54,900 10,384 7,501 10,384 9,216
54,900 54,950 10,396 7,509 10,396 9,229
54,950 55,000 10,409 7,516 10,409 9,241
55,000 55,050 10,421 7,524 10,421 9,254
55,050 55,100 10,434 7,531 10,434 9,266
55,100 55,150 10,446 7,539 10,446 9,279
55,150 55,200 10,459 7,546 10,459 9,291
55,200 55,250 10,471 7,554 10,471 9,304
55,250 55,300 10,484 7,561 10,484 9,316
55,300 55,350 10,496 7,569 10,496 9,329
55,350 55,400 10,509 7,576 10,509 9,341
55,400 55,450 10,521 7,584 10,521 9,354
55,450 55,500 10,534 7,591 10,534 9,366
55,500 55,550 10,546 7,599 10,546 9,379
55,550 55,600 10,559 7,606 10,559 9,391
55,600 55,650 10,571 7,614 10,571 9,404
55,650 55,700 10,584 7,621 10,584 9,416
55,700 55,750 10,596 7,629 10,596 9,429
55,750 55,800 10,609 7,636 10,609 9,441
55,800 55,850 10,621 7,644 10,621 9,454
55,850 55,900 10,634 7,651 10,634 9,466
55,900 55,950 10,646 7,659 10,646 9,479
55,950 56,000 10,659 7,666 10,659 9,491
56,000 56,050 10,671 7,674 10,671 9,504
56,050 56,100 10,684 7,681 10,684 9,516
56,100 56,150 10,696 7,689 10,696 9,529
56,150 56,200 10,709 7,696 10,709 9,541
56,200 56,250 10,721 7,704 10,721 9,554
56,250 56,300 10,734 7,711 10,734 9,566
56,300 56,350 10,746 7,719 10,746 9,579
56,350 56,400 10,759 7,726 10,759 9,591
56,400 56,450 10,771 7,734 10,771 9,604
56,450 56,500 10,784 7,741 10,784 9,616
56,500 56,550 10,796 7,749 10,796 9,629
56,550 56,600 10,809 7,756 10,809 9,641
56,600 56,650 10,821 7,764 10,821 9,654
56,650 56,700 10,834 7,771 10,834 9,666
56,700 56,750 10,846 7,779 10,846 9,679
56,750 56,800 10,859 7,786 10,859 9,691
56,800 56,850 10,871 7,794 10,871 9,704
56,850 56,900 10,884 7,801 10,884 9,716
56,900 56,950 10,896 7,809 10,896 9,729
56,950 57,000 10,909 7,816 10,909 9,741
57,000 57,050 10,921 7,824 10,921 9,754
57,050 57,100 10,934 7,831 10,934 9,766
57,100 57,150 10,946 7,839 10,946 9,779
57,150 57,200 10,959 7,846 10,959 9,791
57,200 57,250 10,971 7,854 10,971 9,804
57,250 57,300 10,984 7,861 10,984 9,816
57,300 57,350 10,996 7,869 10,996 9,829
57,350 57,400 11,009 7,876 11,009 9,841
57,400 57,450 11,021 7,884 11,021 9,854
57,450 57,500 11,034 7,891 11,034 9,866
57,500 57,550 11,046 7,899 11,046 9,879
57,550 57,600 11,059 7,906 11,059 9,891
57,600 57,650 11,071 7,914 11,071 9,904
57,650 57,700 11,084 7,921 11,084 9,916
57,700 57,750 11,096 7,929 11,096 9,929
57,750 57,800 11,109 7,936 11,109 9,941
57,800 57,850 11,121 7,944 11,121 9,954
57,850 57,900 11,134 7,951 11,134 9,966
57,900 57,950 11,146 7,959 11,146 9,979
57,950 58,000 11,159 7,966 11,159 9,991
58,000 58,050 11,171 7,974 11,171 10,004
58,050 58,100 11,184 7,981 11,184 10,016
58,100 58,150 11,196 7,989 11,196 10,029
58,150 58,200 11,209 7,996 11,209 10,041
58,200 58,250 11,221 8,004 11,221 10,054
58,250 58,300 11,234 8,011 11,234 10,066
58,300 58,350 11,246 8,019 11,246 10,079
58,350 58,400 11,259 8,026 11,259 10,091
58,400 58,450 11,271 8,034 11,271 10,104
58,450 58,500 11,284 8,041 11,284 10,116
58,500 58,550 11,296 8,049 11,296 10,129
58,550 58,600 11,309 8,056 11,309 10,141
58,600 58,650 11,321 8,064 11,321 10,154
58,650 58,700 11,334 8,071 11,334 10,166
58,700 58,750 11,346 8,079 11,346 10,179
58,750 58,800 11,359 8,086 11,359 10,191
58,800 58,850 11,371 8,094 11,371 10,204
58,850 58,900 11,384 8,101 11,384 10,216
58,900 58,950 11,396 8,109 11,396 10,229
58,950 59,000 11,409 8,116 11,409 10,241
Page 256

Page 259 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
59,000
60,000
61,000
62,000
63,000
64,000
65,000
66,000
67,000
59,000 59,050 11,421 8,124 11,421 10,254
59,050 59,100 11,434 8,131 11,434 10,266
59,100 59,150 11,446 8,139 11,446 10,279
59,150 59,200 11,459 8,146 11,459 10,291
59,200 59,250 11,471 8,154 11,471 10,304
59,250 59,300 11,484 8,161 11,484 10,316
59,300 59,350 11,496 8,169 11,496 10,329
59,350 59,400 11,509 8,176 11,509 10,341
59,400 59,450 11,521 8,186 11,521 10,354
59,450 59,500 11,534 8,199 11,534 10,366
59,500 59,550 11,546 8,211 11,546 10,379
59,550 59,600 11,559 8,224 11,559 10,391
59,600 59,650 11,571 8,236 11,571 10,404
59,650 59,700 11,584 8,249 11,584 10,416
59,700 59,750 11,596 8,261 11,596 10,429
59,750 59,800 11,609 8,274 11,609 10,441
59,800 59,850 11,621 8,286 11,621 10,454
59,850 59,900 11,634 8,299 11,634 10,466
59,900 59,950 11,646 8,311 11,646 10,479
59,950 60,000 11,659 8,324 11,659 10,491
60,000 60,050 11,671 8,336 11,673 10,504
60,050 60,100 11,684 8,349 11,687 10,516
60,100 60,150 11,696 8,361 11,701 10,529
60,150 60,200 11,709 8,374 11,715 10,541
60,200 60,250 11,721 8,386 11,729 10,554
60,250 60,300 11,734 8,399 11,743 10,566
60,300 60,350 11,746 8,411 11,757 10,579
60,350 60,400 11,759 8,424 11,771 10,591
60,400 60,450 11,771 8,436 11,785 10,604
60,450 60,500 11,784 8,449 11,799 10,616
60,500 60,550 11,796 8,461 11,813 10,629
60,550 60,600 11,809 8,474 11,827 10,641
60,600 60,650 11,821 8,486 11,841 10,654
60,650 60,700 11,834 8,499 11,855 10,666
60,700 60,750 11,846 8,511 11,869 10,679
60,750 60,800 11,859 8,524 11,883 10,691
60,800 60,850 11,871 8,536 11,897 10,704
60,850 60,900 11,884 8,549 11,911 10,716
60,900 60,950 11,896 8,561 11,925 10,729
60,950 61,000 11,909 8,574 11,939 10,741
61,000 61,050 11,921 8,586 11,953 10,754
61,050 61,100 11,934 8,599 11,967 10,766
61,100 61,150 11,946 8,611 11,981 10,779
61,150 61,200 11,959 8,624 11,995 10,791
61,200 61,250 11,971 8,636 12,009 10,804
61,250 61,300 11,984 8,649 12,023 10,816
61,300 61,350 11,996 8,661 12,037 10,829
61,350 61,400 12,009 8,674 12,051 10,841
61,400 61,450 12,021 8,686 12,065 10,854
61,450 61,500 12,034 8,699 12,079 10,866
61,500 61,550 12,046 8,711 12,093 10,879
61,550 61,600 12,059 8,724 12,107 10,891
61,600 61,650 12,071 8,736 12,121 10,904
61,650 61,700 12,084 8,749 12,135 10,916
61,700 61,750 12,096 8,761 12,149 10,929
61,750 61,800 12,109 8,774 12,163 10,941
61,800 61,850 12,121 8,786 12,177 10,954
61,850 61,900 12,134 8,799 12,191 10,966
61,900 61,950 12,146 8,811 12,205 10,979
61,950 62,000 12,159 8,824 12,219 10,991
62,000 62,050 12,171 8,836 12,233 11,004
62,050 62,100 12,184 8,849 12,247 11,016
62,100 62,150 12,196 8,861 12,261 11,029
62,150 62,200 12,209 8,874 12,275 11,041
62,200 62,250 12,221 8,886 12,289 11,054
62,250 62,300 12,234 8,899 12,303 11,066
62,300 62,350 12,246 8,911 12,317 11,079
62,350 62,400 12,259 8,924 12,331 11,091
62,400 62,450 12,271 8,936 12,345 11,104
62,450 62,500 12,284 8,949 12,359 11,116
62,500 62,550 12,296 8,961 12,373 11,129
62,550 62,600 12,309 8,974 12,387 11,141
62,600 62,650 12,321 8,986 12,401 11,154
62,650 62,700 12,334 8,999 12,415 11,166
62,700 62,750 12,346 9,011 12,429 11,179
62,750 62,800 12,359 9,024 12,443 11,191
62,800 62,850 12,371 9,036 12,457 11,204
62,850 62,900 12,384 9,049 12,471 11,216
62,900 62,950 12,396 9,061 12,485 11,229
62,950 63,000 12,409 9,074 12,499 11,241
63,000 63,050 12,421 9,086 12,513 11,254
63,050 63,100 12,434 9,099 12,527 11,266
63,100 63,150 12,446 9,111 12,541 11,279
63,150 63,200 12,459 9,124 12,555 11,291
63,200 63,250 12,471 9,136 12,569 11,304
63,250 63,300 12,484 9,149 12,583 11,316
63,300 63,350 12,496 9,161 12,597 11,329
63,350 63,400 12,509 9,174 12,611 11,341
63,400 63,450 12,521 9,186 12,625 11,354
63,450 63,500 12,534 9,199 12,639 11,366
63,500 63,550 12,546 9,211 12,653 11,379
63,550 63,600 12,559 9,224 12,667 11,391
63,600 63,650 12,571 9,236 12,681 11,404
63,650 63,700 12,584 9,249 12,695 11,416
63,700 63,750 12,596 9,261 12,709 11,429
63,750 63,800 12,609 9,274 12,723 11,441
63,800 63,850 12,621 9,286 12,737 11,454
63,850 63,900 12,634 9,299 12,751 11,466
63,900 63,950 12,646 9,311 12,765 11,479
63,950 64,000 12,659 9,324 12,779 11,491
64,000 64,050 12,671 9,336 12,793 11,504
64,050 64,100 12,684 9,349 12,807 11,516
64,100 64,150 12,696 9,361 12,821 11,529
64,150 64,200 12,709 9,374 12,835 11,541
64,200 64,250 12,721 9,386 12,849 11,554
64,250 64,300 12,734 9,399 12,863 11,566
64,300 64,350 12,746 9,411 12,877 11,579
64,350 64,400 12,759 9,424 12,891 11,591
64,400 64,450 12,771 9,436 12,905 11,604
64,450 64,500 12,784 9,449 12,919 11,616
64,500 64,550 12,796 9,461 12,933 11,629
64,550 64,600 12,809 9,474 12,947 11,641
64,600 64,650 12,821 9,486 12,961 11,654
64,650 64,700 12,834 9,499 12,975 11,666
64,700 64,750 12,846 9,511 12,989 11,679
64,750 64,800 12,859 9,524 13,003 11,691
64,800 64,850 12,871 9,536 13,017 11,704
64,850 64,900 12,884 9,549 13,031 11,716
64,900 64,950 12,896 9,561 13,045 11,729
64,950 65,000 12,909 9,574 13,059 11,741
65,000 65,050 12,921 9,586 13,073 11,754
65,050 65,100 12,934 9,599 13,087 11,766
65,100 65,150 12,946 9,611 13,101 11,779
65,150 65,200 12,959 9,624 13,115 11,791
65,200 65,250 12,971 9,636 13,129 11,804
65,250 65,300 12,984 9,649 13,143 11,816
65,300 65,350 12,996 9,661 13,157 11,829
65,350 65,400 13,009 9,674 13,171 11,841
65,400 65,450 13,021 9,686 13,185 11,854
65,450 65,500 13,034 9,699 13,199 11,866
65,500 65,550 13,046 9,711 13,213 11,879
65,550 65,600 13,059 9,724 13,227 11,891
65,600 65,650 13,071 9,736 13,241 11,904
65,650 65,700 13,084 9,749 13,255 11,916
65,700 65,750 13,096 9,761 13,269 11,929
65,750 65,800 13,109 9,774 13,283 11,941
65,800 65,850 13,121 9,786 13,297 11,954
65,850 65,900 13,134 9,799 13,311 11,966
65,900 65,950 13,146 9,811 13,325 11,979
65,950 66,000 13,159 9,824 13,339 11,991
66,000 66,050 13,171 9,836 13,353 12,004
66,050 66,100 13,184 9,849 13,367 12,016
66,100 66,150 13,196 9,861 13,381 12,029
66,150 66,200 13,209 9,874 13,395 12,041
66,200 66,250 13,221 9,886 13,409 12,054
66,250 66,300 13,234 9,899 13,423 12,066
66,300 66,350 13,246 9,911 13,437 12,079
66,350 66,400 13,259 9,924 13,451 12,091
66,400 66,450 13,271 9,936 13,465 12,104
66,450 66,500 13,284 9,949 13,479 12,116
66,500 66,550 13,296 9,961 13,493 12,129
66,550 66,600 13,309 9,974 13,507 12,141
66,600 66,650 13,321 9,986 13,521 12,154
66,650 66,700 13,334 9,999 13,535 12,166
66,700 66,750 13,346 10,011 13,549 12,179
66,750 66,800 13,359 10,024 13,563 12,191
66,800 66,850 13,371 10,036 13,577 12,204
66,850 66,900 13,384 10,049 13,591 12,216
66,900 66,950 13,396 10,061 13,605 12,229
66,950 67,000 13,409 10,074 13,619 12,241
67,000 67,050 13,421 10,086 13,633 12,254
67,050 67,100 13,434 10,099 13,647 12,266
67,100 67,150 13,446 10,111 13,661 12,279
67,150 67,200 13,459 10,124 13,675 12,291
67,200 67,250 13,471 10,136 13,689 12,304
67,250 67,300 13,484 10,149 13,703 12,316
67,300 67,350 13,496 10,161 13,717 12,329
67,350 67,400 13,509 10,174 13,731 12,341
67,400 67,450 13,521 10,186 13,745 12,354
67,450 67,500 13,534 10,199 13,759 12,366
67,500 67,550 13,546 10,211 13,773 12,379
67,550 67,600 13,559 10,224 13,787 12,391
67,600 67,650 13,571 10,236 13,801 12,404
67,650 67,700 13,584 10,249 13,815 12,416
67,700 67,750 13,596 10,261 13,829 12,429
67,750 67,800 13,609 10,274 13,843 12,441
67,800 67,850 13,621 10,286 13,857 12,454
67,850 67,900 13,634 10,299 13,871 12,466
67,900 67,950 13,646 10,311 13,885 12,479
67,950 68,000 13,659 10,324 13,899 12,491
Page 257

Page 260 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
68,000
69,000
70,000
71,000
72,000
73,000
74,000
75,000
76,000
68,000 68,050 13,671 10,336 13,913 12,504
68,050 68,100 13,684 10,349 13,927 12,516
68,100 68,150 13,696 10,361 13,941 12,529
68,150 68,200 13,709 10,374 13,955 12,541
68,200 68,250 13,721 10,386 13,969 12,554
68,250 68,300 13,734 10,399 13,983 12,566
68,300 68,350 13,746 10,411 13,997 12,579
68,350 68,400 13,759 10,424 14,011 12,591
68,400 68,450 13,771 10,436 14,025 12,604
68,450 68,500 13,784 10,449 14,039 12,616
68,500 68,550 13,796 10,461 14,053 12,629
68,550 68,600 13,809 10,474 14,067 12,641
68,600 68,650 13,821 10,486 14,081 12,654
68,650 68,700 13,834 10,499 14,095 12,666
68,700 68,750 13,846 10,511 14,109 12,679
68,750 68,800 13,859 10,524 14,123 12,691
68,800 68,850 13,871 10,536 14,137 12,704
68,850 68,900 13,884 10,549 14,151 12,716
68,900 68,950 13,896 10,561 14,165 12,729
68,950 69,000 13,909 10,574 14,179 12,741
69,000 69,050 13,921 10,586 14,193 12,754
69,050 69,100 13,934 10,599 14,207 12,766
69,100 69,150 13,946 10,611 14,221 12,779
69,150 69,200 13,959 10,624 14,235 12,791
69,200 69,250 13,971 10,636 14,249 12,804
69,250 69,300 13,984 10,649 14,263 12,816
69,300 69,350 13,996 10,661 14,277 12,829
69,350 69,400 14,009 10,674 14,291 12,841
69,400 69,450 14,021 10,686 14,305 12,854
69,450 69,500 14,034 10,699 14,319 12,866
69,500 69,550 14,046 10,711 14,333 12,879
69,550 69,600 14,059 10,724 14,347 12,891
69,600 69,650 14,071 10,736 14,361 12,904
69,650 69,700 14,084 10,749 14,375 12,916
69,700 69,750 14,096 10,761 14,389 12,929
69,750 69,800 14,109 10,774 14,403 12,941
69,800 69,850 14,121 10,786 14,417 12,954
69,850 69,900 14,134 10,799 14,431 12,966
69,900 69,950 14,146 10,811 14,445 12,979
69,950 70,000 14,159 10,824 14,459 12,991
70,000 70,050 14,171 10,836 14,473 13,004
70,050 70,100 14,184 10,849 14,487 13,016
70,100 70,150 14,196 10,861 14,501 13,029
70,150 70,200 14,209 10,874 14,515 13,041
70,200 70,250 14,221 10,886 14,529 13,054
70,250 70,300 14,234 10,899 14,543 13,066
70,300 70,350 14,246 10,911 14,557 13,079
70,350 70,400 14,259 10,924 14,571 13,091
70,400 70,450 14,271 10,936 14,585 13,104
70,450 70,500 14,284 10,949 14,599 13,116
70,500 70,550 14,296 10,961 14,613 13,129
70,550 70,600 14,309 10,974 14,627 13,141
70,600 70,650 14,321 10,986 14,641 13,154
70,650 70,700 14,334 10,999 14,655 13,166
70,700 70,750 14,346 11,011 14,669 13,179
70,750 70,800 14,359 11,024 14,683 13,191
70,800 70,850 14,371 11,036 14,697 13,204
70,850 70,900 14,384 11,049 14,711 13,216
70,900 70,950 14,396 11,061 14,725 13,229
70,950 71,000 14,409 11,074 14,739 13,241
71,000 71,050 14,421 11,086 14,753 13,254
71,050 71,100 14,434 11,099 14,767 13,266
71,100 71,150 14,446 11,111 14,781 13,279
71,150 71,200 14,459 11,124 14,795 13,291
71,200 71,250 14,471 11,136 14,809 13,304
71,250 71,300 14,484 11,149 14,823 13,316
71,300 71,350 14,496 11,161 14,837 13,329
71,350 71,400 14,509 11,174 14,851 13,341
71,400 71,450 14,521 11,186 14,865 13,354
71,450 71,500 14,534 11,199 14,879 13,366
71,500 71,550 14,546 11,211 14,893 13,379
71,550 71,600 14,559 11,224 14,907 13,391
71,600 71,650 14,571 11,236 14,921 13,404
71,650 71,700 14,584 11,249 14,935 13,416
71,700 71,750 14,596 11,261 14,949 13,429
71,750 71,800 14,609 11,274 14,963 13,441
71,800 71,850 14,621 11,286 14,977 13,454
71,850 71,900 14,634 11,299 14,991 13,466
71,900 71,950 14,646 11,311 15,005 13,479
71,950 72,000 14,660 11,324 15,019 13,491
72,000 72,050 14,674 11,336 15,033 13,504
72,050 72,100 14,688 11,349 15,047 13,516
72,100 72,150 14,702 11,361 15,061 13,529
72,150 72,200 14,716 11,374 15,075 13,541
72,200 72,250 14,730 11,386 15,089 13,554
72,250 72,300 14,744 11,399 15,103 13,566
72,300 72,350 14,758 11,411 15,117 13,579
72,350 72,400 14,772 11,424 15,131 13,591
72,400 72,450 14,786 11,436 15,145 13,604
72,450 72,500 14,800 11,449 15,159 13,616
72,500 72,550 14,814 11,461 15,173 13,629
72,550 72,600 14,828 11,474 15,187 13,641
72,600 72,650 14,842 11,486 15,201 13,654
72,650 72,700 14,856 11,499 15,215 13,666
72,700 72,750 14,870 11,511 15,229 13,679
72,750 72,800 14,884 11,524 15,243 13,691
72,800 72,850 14,898 11,536 15,257 13,704
72,850 72,900 14,912 11,549 15,271 13,716
72,900 72,950 14,926 11,561 15,285 13,729
72,950 73,000 14,940 11,574 15,299 13,741
73,000 73,050 14,954 11,586 15,313 13,754
73,050 73,100 14,968 11,599 15,327 13,766
73,100 73,150 14,982 11,611 15,341 13,779
73,150 73,200 14,996 11,624 15,355 13,791
73,200 73,250 15,010 11,636 15,369 13,804
73,250 73,300 15,024 11,649 15,383 13,816
73,300 73,350 15,038 11,661 15,397 13,829
73,350 73,400 15,052 11,674 15,411 13,841
73,400 73,450 15,066 11,686 15,425 13,854
73,450 73,500 15,080 11,699 15,439 13,866
73,500 73,550 15,094 11,711 15,453 13,879
73,550 73,600 15,108 11,724 15,467 13,891
73,600 73,650 15,122 11,736 15,481 13,904
73,650 73,700 15,136 11,749 15,495 13,916
73,700 73,750 15,150 11,761 15,509 13,929
73,750 73,800 15,164 11,774 15,523 13,941
73,800 73,850 15,178 11,786 15,537 13,954
73,850 73,900 15,192 11,799 15,551 13,966
73,900 73,950 15,206 11,811 15,565 13,979
73,950 74,000 15,220 11,824 15,579 13,991
74,000 74,050 15,234 11,836 15,593 14,004
74,050 74,100 15,248 11,849 15,607 14,016
74,100 74,150 15,262 11,861 15,621 14,029
74,150 74,200 15,276 11,874 15,635 14,041
74,200 74,250 15,290 11,886 15,649 14,054
74,250 74,300 15,304 11,899 15,663 14,066
74,300 74,350 15,318 11,911 15,677 14,079
74,350 74,400 15,332 11,924 15,691 14,091
74,400 74,450 15,346 11,936 15,705 14,104
74,450 74,500 15,360 11,949 15,719 14,116
74,500 74,550 15,374 11,961 15,733 14,129
74,550 74,600 15,388 11,974 15,747 14,141
74,600 74,650 15,402 11,986 15,761 14,154
74,650 74,700 15,416 11,999 15,775 14,166
74,700 74,750 15,430 12,011 15,789 14,179
74,750 74,800 15,444 12,024 15,803 14,191
74,800 74,850 15,458 12,036 15,817 14,204
74,850 74,900 15,472 12,049 15,831 14,216
74,900 74,950 15,486 12,061 15,845 14,229
74,950 75,000 15,500 12,074 15,859 14,241
75,000 75,050 15,514 12,086 15,873 14,254
75,050 75,100 15,528 12,099 15,887 14,266
75,100 75,150 15,542 12,111 15,901 14,279
75,150 75,200 15,556 12,124 15,915 14,291
75,200 75,250 15,570 12,136 15,929 14,304
75,250 75,300 15,584 12,149 15,943 14,316
75,300 75,350 15,598 12,161 15,957 14,329
75,350 75,400 15,612 12,174 15,971 14,341
75,400 75,450 15,626 12,186 15,985 14,354
75,450 75,500 15,640 12,199 15,999 14,366
75,500 75,550 15,654 12,211 16,013 14,379
75,550 75,600 15,668 12,224 16,027 14,391
75,600 75,650 15,682 12,236 16,041 14,404
75,650 75,700 15,696 12,249 16,055 14,416
75,700 75,750 15,710 12,261 16,069 14,429
75,750 75,800 15,724 12,274 16,083 14,441
75,800 75,850 15,738 12,286 16,097 14,454
75,850 75,900 15,752 12,299 16,111 14,466
75,900 75,950 15,766 12,311 16,125 14,479
75,950 76,000 15,780 12,324 16,139 14,491
76,000 76,050 15,794 12,336 16,153 14,504
76,050 76,100 15,808 12,349 16,167 14,516
76,100 76,150 15,822 12,361 16,181 14,529
76,150 76,200 15,836 12,374 16,195 14,541
76,200 76,250 15,850 12,386 16,209 14,554
76,250 76,300 15,864 12,399 16,223 14,566
76,300 76,350 15,878 12,411 16,237 14,579
76,350 76,400 15,892 12,424 16,251 14,591
76,400 76,450 15,906 12,436 16,265 14,604
76,450 76,500 15,920 12,449 16,279 14,616
76,500 76,550 15,934 12,461 16,293 14,629
76,550 76,600 15,948 12,474 16,307 14,641
76,600 76,650 15,962 12,486 16,321 14,654
76,650 76,700 15,976 12,499 16,335 14,666
76,700 76,750 15,990 12,511 16,349 14,679
76,750 76,800 16,004 12,524 16,363 14,691
76,800 76,850 16,018 12,536 16,377 14,704
76,850 76,900 16,032 12,549 16,391 14,716
76,900 76,950 16,046 12,561 16,405 14,729
76,950 77,000 16,060 12,574 16,419 14,741
Page 258

Page 261 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
77,000
78,000
79,000
80,000
81,000
82,000
83,000
84,000
85,000
77,000 77,050 16,074 12,586 16,433 14,754
77,050 77,100 16,088 12,599 16,447 14,766
77,100 77,150 16,102 12,611 16,461 14,779
77,150 77,200 16,116 12,624 16,475 14,791
77,200 77,250 16,130 12,636 16,489 14,804
77,250 77,300 16,144 12,649 16,503 14,816
77,300 77,350 16,158 12,661 16,517 14,829
77,350 77,400 16,172 12,674 16,531 14,841
77,400 77,450 16,186 12,686 16,545 14,854
77,450 77,500 16,200 12,699 16,559 14,866
77,500 77,550 16,214 12,711 16,573 14,879
77,550 77,600 16,228 12,724 16,587 14,891
77,600 77,650 16,242 12,736 16,601 14,904
77,650 77,700 16,256 12,749 16,615 14,916
77,700 77,750 16,270 12,761 16,629 14,929
77,750 77,800 16,284 12,774 16,643 14,941
77,800 77,850 16,298 12,786 16,657 14,954
77,850 77,900 16,312 12,799 16,671 14,966
77,900 77,950 16,326 12,811 16,685 14,979
77,950 78,000 16,340 12,824 16,699 14,991
78,000 78,050 16,354 12,836 16,713 15,004
78,050 78,100 16,368 12,849 16,727 15,016
78,100 78,150 16,382 12,861 16,741 15,029
78,150 78,200 16,396 12,874 16,755 15,041
78,200 78,250 16,410 12,886 16,769 15,054
78,250 78,300 16,424 12,899 16,783 15,066
78,300 78,350 16,438 12,911 16,797 15,079
78,350 78,400 16,452 12,924 16,811 15,091
78,400 78,450 16,466 12,936 16,825 15,104
78,450 78,500 16,480 12,949 16,839 15,116
78,500 78,550 16,494 12,961 16,853 15,129
78,550 78,600 16,508 12,974 16,867 15,141
78,600 78,650 16,522 12,986 16,881 15,154
78,650 78,700 16,536 12,999 16,895 15,166
78,700 78,750 16,550 13,011 16,909 15,179
78,750 78,800 16,564 13,024 16,923 15,191
78,800 78,850 16,578 13,036 16,937 15,204
78,850 78,900 16,592 13,049 16,951 15,216
78,900 78,950 16,606 13,061 16,965 15,229
78,950 79,000 16,620 13,074 16,979 15,241
79,000 79,050 16,634 13,086 16,993 15,254
79,050 79,100 16,648 13,099 17,007 15,266
79,100 79,150 16,662 13,111 17,021 15,279
79,150 79,200 16,676 13,124 17,035 15,291
79,200 79,250 16,690 13,136 17,049 15,304
79,250 79,300 16,704 13,149 17,063 15,316
79,300 79,350 16,718 13,161 17,077 15,329
79,350 79,400 16,732 13,174 17,091 15,341
79,400 79,450 16,746 13,186 17,105 15,354
79,450 79,500 16,760 13,199 17,119 15,366
79,500 79,550 16,774 13,211 17,133 15,379
79,550 79,600 16,788 13,224 17,147 15,391
79,600 79,650 16,802 13,236 17,161 15,404
79,650 79,700 16,816 13,249 17,175 15,416
79,700 79,750 16,830 13,261 17,189 15,429
79,750 79,800 16,844 13,274 17,203 15,441
79,800 79,850 16,858 13,286 17,217 15,454
79,850 79,900 16,872 13,299 17,231 15,466
79,900 79,950 16,886 13,311 17,245 15,479
79,950 80,000 16,900 13,324 17,259 15,491
80,000 80,050 16,914 13,336 17,273 15,504
80,050 80,100 16,928 13,349 17,287 15,516
80,100 80,150 16,942 13,361 17,301 15,529
80,150 80,200 16,956 13,374 17,315 15,541
80,200 80,250 16,970 13,386 17,329 15,554
80,250 80,300 16,984 13,399 17,343 15,566
80,300 80,350 16,998 13,411 17,357 15,579
80,350 80,400 17,012 13,424 17,371 15,591
80,400 80,450 17,026 13,436 17,385 15,604
80,450 80,500 17,040 13,449 17,399 15,616
80,500 80,550 17,054 13,461 17,413 15,629
80,550 80,600 17,068 13,474 17,427 15,641
80,600 80,650 17,082 13,486 17,441 15,654
80,650 80,700 17,096 13,499 17,455 15,666
80,700 80,750 17,110 13,511 17,469 15,679
80,750 80,800 17,124 13,524 17,483 15,691
80,800 80,850 17,138 13,536 17,497 15,704
80,850 80,900 17,152 13,549 17,511 15,716
80,900 80,950 17,166 13,561 17,525 15,729
80,950 81,000 17,180 13,574 17,539 15,741
81,000 81,050 17,194 13,586 17,553 15,754
81,050 81,100 17,208 13,599 17,567 15,766
81,100 81,150 17,222 13,611 17,581 15,779
81,150 81,200 17,236 13,624 17,595 15,791
81,200 81,250 17,250 13,636 17,609 15,804
81,250 81,300 17,264 13,649 17,623 15,816
81,300 81,350 17,278 13,661 17,637 15,829
81,350 81,400 17,292 13,674 17,651 15,841
81,400 81,450 17,306 13,686 17,665 15,854
81,450 81,500 17,320 13,699 17,679 15,866
81,500 81,550 17,334 13,711 17,693 15,879
81,550 81,600 17,348 13,724 17,707 15,891
81,600 81,650 17,362 13,736 17,721 15,904
81,650 81,700 17,376 13,749 17,735 15,916
81,700 81,750 17,390 13,761 17,749 15,929
81,750 81,800 17,404 13,774 17,763 15,941
81,800 81,850 17,418 13,786 17,777 15,954
81,850 81,900 17,432 13,799 17,791 15,966
81,900 81,950 17,446 13,811 17,805 15,979
81,950 82,000 17,460 13,824 17,819 15,991
82,000 82,050 17,474 13,836 17,833 16,004
82,050 82,100 17,488 13,849 17,847 16,016
82,100 82,150 17,502 13,861 17,861 16,029
82,150 82,200 17,516 13,874 17,875 16,041
82,200 82,250 17,530 13,886 17,889 16,054
82,250 82,300 17,544 13,899 17,903 16,066
82,300 82,350 17,558 13,911 17,917 16,079
82,350 82,400 17,572 13,924 17,931 16,091
82,400 82,450 17,586 13,936 17,945 16,104
82,450 82,500 17,600 13,949 17,959 16,116
82,500 82,550 17,614 13,961 17,973 16,129
82,550 82,600 17,628 13,974 17,987 16,141
82,600 82,650 17,642 13,986 18,001 16,154
82,650 82,700 17,656 13,999 18,015 16,166
82,700 82,750 17,670 14,011 18,029 16,179
82,750 82,800 17,684 14,024 18,043 16,191
82,800 82,850 17,698 14,036 18,057 16,204
82,850 82,900 17,712 14,049 18,071 16,216
82,900 82,950 17,726 14,061 18,085 16,229
82,950 83,000 17,740 14,074 18,099 16,241
83,000 83,050 17,754 14,086 18,113 16,254
83,050 83,100 17,768 14,099 18,127 16,266
83,100 83,150 17,782 14,111 18,141 16,279
83,150 83,200 17,796 14,124 18,155 16,291
83,200 83,250 17,810 14,136 18,169 16,304
83,250 83,300 17,824 14,149 18,183 16,316
83,300 83,350 17,838 14,161 18,197 16,329
83,350 83,400 17,852 14,174 18,211 16,341
83,400 83,450 17,866 14,186 18,225 16,354
83,450 83,500 17,880 14,199 18,239 16,366
83,500 83,550 17,894 14,211 18,253 16,379
83,550 83,600 17,908 14,224 18,267 16,391
83,600 83,650 17,922 14,236 18,281 16,404
83,650 83,700 17,936 14,249 18,295 16,416
83,700 83,750 17,950 14,261 18,309 16,429
83,750 83,800 17,964 14,274 18,323 16,441
83,800 83,850 17,978 14,286 18,337 16,454
83,850 83,900 17,992 14,299 18,351 16,466
83,900 83,950 18,006 14,311 18,365 16,479
83,950 84,000 18,020 14,324 18,379 16,491
84,000 84,050 18,034 14,336 18,393 16,504
84,050 84,100 18,048 14,349 18,407 16,516
84,100 84,150 18,062 14,361 18,421 16,529
84,150 84,200 18,076 14,374 18,435 16,541
84,200 84,250 18,090 14,386 18,449 16,554
84,250 84,300 18,104 14,399 18,463 16,566
84,300 84,350 18,118 14,411 18,477 16,579
84,350 84,400 18,132 14,424 18,491 16,591
84,400 84,450 18,146 14,436 18,505 16,604
84,450 84,500 18,160 14,449 18,519 16,616
84,500 84,550 18,174 14,461 18,533 16,629
84,550 84,600 18,188 14,474 18,547 16,641
84,600 84,650 18,202 14,486 18,561 16,654
84,650 84,700 18,216 14,499 18,575 16,666
84,700 84,750 18,230 14,511 18,589 16,679
84,750 84,800 18,244 14,524 18,603 16,691
84,800 84,850 18,258 14,536 18,617 16,704
84,850 84,900 18,272 14,549 18,631 16,716
84,900 84,950 18,286 14,561 18,645 16,729
84,950 85,000 18,300 14,574 18,659 16,741
85,000 85,050 18,314 14,586 18,673 16,754
85,050 85,100 18,328 14,599 18,687 16,766
85,100 85,150 18,342 14,611 18,701 16,779
85,150 85,200 18,356 14,624 18,715 16,791
85,200 85,250 18,370 14,636 18,729 16,804
85,250 85,300 18,384 14,649 18,743 16,816
85,300 85,350 18,398 14,661 18,757 16,829
85,350 85,400 18,412 14,674 18,771 16,841
85,400 85,450 18,426 14,686 18,785 16,854
85,450 85,500 18,440 14,699 18,799 16,866
85,500 85,550 18,454 14,711 18,813 16,879
85,550 85,600 18,468 14,724 18,827 16,891
85,600 85,650 18,482 14,736 18,841 16,904
85,650 85,700 18,496 14,749 18,855 16,916
85,700 85,750 18,510 14,761 18,869 16,929
85,750 85,800 18,524 14,774 18,883 16,941
85,800 85,850 18,538 14,786 18,897 16,954
85,850 85,900 18,552 14,799 18,911 16,966
85,900 85,950 18,566 14,811 18,925 16,979
85,950 86,000 18,580 14,824 18,939 16,991
Page 259

Page 262 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
86,000
87,000
88,000
89,000
90,000
91,000
92,000
93,000
94,000
86,000 86,050 18,594 14,836 18,953 17,004
86,050 86,100 18,608 14,849 18,967 17,016
86,100 86,150 18,622 14,861 18,981 17,029
86,150 86,200 18,636 14,874 18,995 17,041
86,200 86,250 18,650 14,886 19,009 17,054
86,250 86,300 18,664 14,899 19,023 17,066
86,300 86,350 18,678 14,911 19,037 17,079
86,350 86,400 18,692 14,924 19,051 17,091
86,400 86,450 18,706 14,936 19,065 17,104
86,450 86,500 18,720 14,949 19,079 17,116
86,500 86,550 18,734 14,961 19,093 17,129
86,550 86,600 18,748 14,974 19,107 17,141
86,600 86,650 18,762 14,986 19,121 17,154
86,650 86,700 18,776 14,999 19,135 17,166
86,700 86,750 18,790 15,011 19,149 17,179
86,750 86,800 18,804 15,024 19,163 17,191
86,800 86,850 18,818 15,036 19,177 17,204
86,850 86,900 18,832 15,049 19,191 17,216
86,900 86,950 18,846 15,061 19,205 17,229
86,950 87,000 18,860 15,074 19,219 17,241
87,000 87,050 18,874 15,086 19,233 17,254
87,050 87,100 18,888 15,099 19,247 17,266
87,100 87,150 18,902 15,111 19,261 17,279
87,150 87,200 18,916 15,124 19,275 17,291
87,200 87,250 18,930 15,136 19,289 17,304
87,250 87,300 18,944 15,149 19,303 17,316
87,300 87,350 18,958 15,161 19,317 17,329
87,350 87,400 18,972 15,174 19,331 17,341
87,400 87,450 18,986 15,186 19,345 17,354
87,450 87,500 19,000 15,199 19,359 17,366
87,500 87,550 19,014 15,211 19,373 17,379
87,550 87,600 19,028 15,224 19,387 17,391
87,600 87,650 19,042 15,236 19,401 17,404
87,650 87,700 19,056 15,249 19,415 17,416
87,700 87,750 19,070 15,261 19,429 17,429
87,750 87,800 19,084 15,274 19,443 17,441
87,800 87,850 19,098 15,286 19,457 17,454
87,850 87,900 19,112 15,299 19,471 17,466
87,900 87,950 19,126 15,311 19,485 17,479
87,950 88,000 19,140 15,324 19,499 17,491
88,000 88,050 19,154 15,336 19,513 17,504
88,050 88,100 19,168 15,349 19,527 17,516
88,100 88,150 19,182 15,361 19,541 17,529
88,150 88,200 19,196 15,374 19,555 17,541
88,200 88,250 19,210 15,386 19,569 17,554
88,250 88,300 19,224 15,399 19,583 17,566
88,300 88,350 19,238 15,411 19,597 17,579
88,350 88,400 19,252 15,424 19,611 17,591
88,400 88,450 19,266 15,436 19,625 17,604
88,450 88,500 19,280 15,449 19,639 17,616
88,500 88,550 19,294 15,461 19,653 17,629
88,550 88,600 19,308 15,474 19,667 17,641
88,600 88,650 19,322 15,486 19,681 17,654
88,650 88,700 19,336 15,499 19,695 17,666
88,700 88,750 19,350 15,511 19,709 17,679
88,750 88,800 19,364 15,524 19,723 17,691
88,800 88,850 19,378 15,536 19,737 17,704
88,850 88,900 19,392 15,549 19,751 17,716
88,900 88,950 19,406 15,561 19,765 17,729
88,950 89,000 19,420 15,574 19,779 17,741
89,000 89,050 19,434 15,586 19,793 17,754
89,050 89,100 19,448 15,599 19,807 17,766
89,100 89,150 19,462 15,611 19,821 17,779
89,150 89,200 19,476 15,624 19,835 17,791
89,200 89,250 19,490 15,636 19,849 17,804
89,250 89,300 19,504 15,649 19,863 17,816
89,300 89,350 19,518 15,661 19,877 17,829
89,350 89,400 19,532 15,674 19,891 17,841
89,400 89,450 19,546 15,686 19,905 17,854
89,450 89,500 19,560 15,699 19,919 17,866
89,500 89,550 19,574 15,711 19,933 17,879
89,550 89,600 19,588 15,724 19,947 17,891
89,600 89,650 19,602 15,736 19,961 17,904
89,650 89,700 19,616 15,749 19,975 17,916
89,700 89,750 19,630 15,761 19,989 17,929
89,750 89,800 19,644 15,774 20,003 17,941
89,800 89,850 19,658 15,786 20,017 17,954
89,850 89,900 19,672 15,799 20,031 17,966
89,900 89,950 19,686 15,811 20,045 17,979
89,950 90,000 19,700 15,824 20,059 17,991
90,000 90,050 19,714 15,836 20,073 18,004
90,050 90,100 19,728 15,849 20,087 18,016
90,100 90,150 19,742 15,861 20,101 18,029
90,150 90,200 19,756 15,874 20,115 18,041
90,200 90,250 19,770 15,886 20,129 18,054
90,250 90,300 19,784 15,899 20,143 18,066
90,300 90,350 19,798 15,911 20,157 18,079
90,350 90,400 19,812 15,924 20,171 18,091
90,400 90,450 19,826 15,936 20,185 18,104
90,450 90,500 19,840 15,949 20,199 18,116
90,500 90,550 19,854 15,961 20,213 18,129
90,550 90,600 19,868 15,974 20,227 18,141
90,600 90,650 19,882 15,986 20,241 18,154
90,650 90,700 19,896 15,999 20,255 18,166
90,700 90,750 19,910 16,011 20,269 18,179
90,750 90,800 19,924 16,024 20,283 18,191
90,800 90,850 19,938 16,036 20,297 18,204
90,850 90,900 19,952 16,049 20,311 18,216
90,900 90,950 19,966 16,061 20,325 18,229
90,950 91,000 19,980 16,074 20,339 18,241
91,000 91,050 19,994 16,086 20,353 18,254
91,050 91,100 20,008 16,099 20,367 18,266
91,100 91,150 20,022 16,111 20,381 18,279
91,150 91,200 20,036 16,124 20,395 18,291
91,200 91,250 20,050 16,136 20,409 18,304
91,250 91,300 20,064 16,149 20,423 18,316
91,300 91,350 20,078 16,161 20,437 18,329
91,350 91,400 20,092 16,174 20,451 18,341
91,400 91,450 20,106 16,186 20,466 18,354
91,450 91,500 20,120 16,199 20,483 18,366
91,500 91,550 20,134 16,211 20,499 18,379
91,550 91,600 20,148 16,224 20,516 18,391
91,600 91,650 20,162 16,236 20,532 18,404
91,650 91,700 20,176 16,249 20,549 18,416
91,700 91,750 20,190 16,261 20,565 18,429
91,750 91,800 20,204 16,274 20,582 18,441
91,800 91,850 20,218 16,286 20,598 18,454
91,850 91,900 20,232 16,299 20,615 18,466
91,900 91,950 20,246 16,311 20,631 18,479
91,950 92,000 20,260 16,324 20,648 18,491
92,000 92,050 20,274 16,336 20,664 18,504
92,050 92,100 20,288 16,349 20,681 18,516
92,100 92,150 20,302 16,361 20,697 18,529
92,150 92,200 20,316 16,374 20,714 18,541
92,200 92,250 20,330 16,386 20,730 18,554
92,250 92,300 20,344 16,399 20,747 18,566
92,300 92,350 20,358 16,411 20,763 18,579
92,350 92,400 20,372 16,424 20,780 18,591
92,400 92,450 20,386 16,436 20,796 18,604
92,450 92,500 20,400 16,449 20,813 18,616
92,500 92,550 20,414 16,461 20,829 18,629
92,550 92,600 20,428 16,474 20,846 18,641
92,600 92,650 20,442 16,486 20,862 18,654
92,650 92,700 20,456 16,499 20,879 18,666
92,700 92,750 20,470 16,511 20,895 18,679
92,750 92,800 20,484 16,524 20,912 18,691
92,800 92,850 20,498 16,536 20,928 18,704
92,850 92,900 20,512 16,549 20,945 18,716
92,900 92,950 20,526 16,561 20,961 18,729
92,950 93,000 20,540 16,574 20,978 18,741
93,000 93,050 20,554 16,586 20,994 18,754
93,050 93,100 20,568 16,599 21,011 18,766
93,100 93,150 20,582 16,611 21,027 18,779
93,150 93,200 20,596 16,624 21,044 18,791
93,200 93,250 20,610 16,636 21,060 18,804
93,250 93,300 20,624 16,649 21,077 18,816
93,300 93,350 20,638 16,661 21,093 18,829
93,350 93,400 20,652 16,674 21,110 18,841
93,400 93,450 20,666 16,686 21,126 18,854
93,450 93,500 20,680 16,699 21,143 18,866
93,500 93,550 20,694 16,711 21,159 18,879
93,550 93,600 20,708 16,724 21,176 18,891
93,600 93,650 20,722 16,736 21,192 18,904
93,650 93,700 20,736 16,749 21,209 18,916
93,700 93,750 20,750 16,761 21,225 18,929
93,750 93,800 20,764 16,774 21,242 18,941
93,800 93,850 20,778 16,786 21,258 18,954
93,850 93,900 20,792 16,799 21,275 18,966
93,900 93,950 20,806 16,811 21,291 18,979
93,950 94,000 20,820 16,824 21,308 18,991
94,000 94,050 20,834 16,836 21,324 19,004
94,050 94,100 20,848 16,849 21,341 19,016
94,100 94,150 20,862 16,861 21,357 19,029
94,150 94,200 20,876 16,874 21,374 19,041
94,200 94,250 20,890 16,886 21,390 19,054
94,250 94,300 20,904 16,899 21,407 19,066
94,300 94,350 20,918 16,911 21,423 19,079
94,350 94,400 20,932 16,924 21,440 19,091
94,400 94,450 20,946 16,936 21,456 19,104
94,450 94,500 20,960 16,949 21,473 19,116
94,500 94,550 20,974 16,961 21,489 19,129
94,550 94,600 20,988 16,974 21,506 19,141
94,600 94,650 21,002 16,986 21,522 19,154
94,650 94,700 21,016 16,999 21,539 19,166
94,700 94,750 21,030 17,011 21,555 19,179
94,750 94,800 21,044 17,024 21,572 19,191
94,800 94,850 21,058 17,036 21,588 19,204
94,850 94,900 21,072 17,049 21,605 19,216
94,900 94,950 21,086 17,061 21,621 19,229
94,950 95,000 21,100 17,074 21,638 19,241
Page 260

Page 263 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$100,000 or over —
use the Tax
Computation
Worksheet that
immediately follows
the Tax Rate
Schedules
2005 Tax Table—Continued
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—
If line 43
(taxable
income) is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
95,000
96,000
97,000
98,000
99,000
95,000 95,050 21,114 17,086 21,654 19,254
95,050 95,100 21,128 17,099 21,671 19,266
95,100 95,150 21,142 17,111 21,687 19,279
95,150 95,200 21,156 17,124 21,704 19,291
95,200 95,250 21,170 17,136 21,720 19,304
95,250 95,300 21,184 17,149 21,737 19,316
95,300 95,350 21,198 17,161 21,753 19,329
95,350 95,400 21,212 17,174 21,770 19,341
95,400 95,450 21,226 17,186 21,786 19,354
95,450 95,500 21,240 17,199 21,803 19,366
95,500 95,550 21,254 17,211 21,819 19,379
95,550 95,600 21,268 17,224 21,836 19,391
95,600 95,650 21,282 17,236 21,852 19,404
95,650 95,700 21,296 17,249 21,869 19,416
95,700 95,750 21,310 17,261 21,885 19,429
95,750 95,800 21,324 17,274 21,902 19,441
95,800 95,850 21,338 17,286 21,918 19,454
95,850 95,900 21,352 17,299 21,935 19,466
95,900 95,950 21,366 17,311 21,951 19,479
95,950 96,000 21,380 17,324 21,968 19,491
96,000 96,050 21,394 17,336 21,984 19,504
96,050 96,100 21,408 17,349 22,001 19,516
96,100 96,150 21,422 17,361 22,017 19,529
96,150 96,200 21,436 17,374 22,034 19,541
96,200 96,250 21,450 17,386 22,050 19,554
96,250 96,300 21,464 17,399 22,067 19,566
96,300 96,350 21,478 17,411 22,083 19,579
96,350 96,400 21,492 17,424 22,100 19,591
96,400 96,450 21,506 17,436 22,116 19,604
96,450 96,500 21,520 17,449 22,133 19,616
96,500 96,550 21,534 17,461 22,149 19,629
96,550 96,600 21,548 17,474 22,166 19,641
96,600 96,650 21,562 17,486 22,182 19,654
96,650 96,700 21,576 17,499 22,199 19,666
96,700 96,750 21,590 17,511 22,215 19,679
96,750 96,800 21,604 17,524 22,232 19,691
96,800 96,850 21,618 17,536 22,248 19,704
96,850 96,900 21,632 17,549 22,265 19,716
96,900 96,950 21,646 17,561 22,281 19,729
96,950 97,000 21,660 17,574 22,298 19,741
97,000 97,050 21,674 17,586 22,314 19,754
97,050 97,100 21,688 17,599 22,331 19,766
97,100 97,150 21,702 17,611 22,347 19,779
97,150 97,200 21,716 17,624 22,364 19,791
97,200 97,250 21,730 17,636 22,380 19,804
97,250 97,300 21,744 17,649 22,397 19,816
97,300 97,350 21,758 17,661 22,413 19,829
97,350 97,400 21,772 17,674 22,430 19,841
97,400 97,450 21,786 17,686 22,446 19,854
97,450 97,500 21,800 17,699 22,463 19,866
97,500 97,550 21,814 17,711 22,479 19,879
97,550 97,600 21,828 17,724 22,496 19,891
97,600 97,650 21,842 17,736 22,512 19,904
97,650 97,700 21,856 17,749 22,529 19,916
97,700 97,750 21,870 17,761 22,545 19,929
97,750 97,800 21,884 17,774 22,562 19,941
97,800 97,850 21,898 17,786 22,578 19,954
97,850 97,900 21,912 17,799 22,595 19,966
97,900 97,950 21,926 17,811 22,611 19,979
97,950 98,000 21,940 17,824 22,628 19,991
98,000 98,050 21,954 17,836 22,644 20,004
98,050 98,100 21,968 17,849 22,661 20,016
98,100 98,150 21,982 17,861 22,677 20,029
98,150 98,200 21,996 17,874 22,694 20,041
98,200 98,250 22,010 17,886 22,710 20,054
98,250 98,300 22,024 17,899 22,727 20,066
98,300 98,350 22,038 17,911 22,743 20,079
98,350 98,400 22,052 17,924 22,760 20,091
98,400 98,450 22,066 17,936 22,776 20,104
98,450 98,500 22,080 17,949 22,793 20,116
98,500 98,550 22,094 17,961 22,809 20,129
98,550 98,600 22,108 17,974 22,826 20,141
98,600 98,650 22,122 17,986 22,842 20,154
98,650 98,700 22,136 17,999 22,859 20,166
98,700 98,750 22,150 18,011 22,875 20,179
98,750 98,800 22,164 18,024 22,892 20,191
98,800 98,850 22,178 18,036 22,908 20,204
98,850 98,900 22,192 18,049 22,925 20,216
98,900 98,950 22,206 18,061 22,941 20,229
98,950 99,000 22,220 18,074 22,958 20,241
99,000 99,050 22,234 18,086 22,974 20,254
99,050 99,100 22,248 18,099 22,991 20,266
99,100 99,150 22,262 18,111 23,007 20,279
99,150 99,200 22,276 18,124 23,024 20,291
99,200 99,250 22,290 18,136 23,040 20,304
99,250 99,300 22,304 18,149 23,057 20,316
99,300 99,350 22,318 18,161 23,073 20,329
99,350 99,400 22,332 18,174 23,090 20,341
99,400 99,450 22,346 18,186 23,106 20,354
99,450 99,500 22,360 18,199 23,123 20,366
99,500 99,550 22,374 18,211 23,139 20,379
99,550 99,600 22,388 18,224 23,156 20,391
99,600 99,650 22,402 18,236 23,172 20,404
99,650 99,700 22,416 18,249 23,189 20,416
99,700 99,750 22,430 18,261 23,205 20,429
99,750 99,800 22,444 18,274 23,222 20,441
99,800 99,850 22,458 18,286 23,238 20,454
99,850 99,900 22,472 18,299 23,255 20,466
99,900 99,950 22,486 18,311 23,271 20,479
99,950 100,000 22,500 18,324 23,288 20,491
Page 261

Page 264 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
7,300
29,700
71,950
150,150
326,450
$7,300
29,700
71,950
150,150
326,450
$0
7,300
29,700
71,950
150,150
326,450
$0
14,600
59,400
119,950
182,800
326,450
$0
7,300
29,700
59,975
91,400
163,225
$0
10,450
39,800
102,800
166,450
326,450
$14,600
59,400
119,950
182,800
326,450
$7,300
29,700
59,975
91,400
163,225
$10,450
39,800
102,800
166,450
326,450
$0
14,600
59,400
119,950
182,800
326,450
$0
7,300
29,700
59,975
91,400
163,225
$0
10,450
39,800
102,800
166,450
326,450
10%
$730.00 + 15%
4,090.00 + 25%
14,652.50 + 28%
36,548.50 + 33%
94,727.50 + 35%
10%
$1,460.00 + 15%
8,180.00 + 25%
23,317.50 + 28%
40,915.50 + 33%
88,320.00 + 35%
10%
$730.00 + 15%
4,090.00 + 25%
11,658.75 + 28%
20,457.75 + 33%
44,160.00 + 35%
10%
$1,045.00 + 15%
5,447.50 + 25%
21,197.50 + 28%
39,019.50 + 33%
91,819.50 + 35%
Page 262

Page 265 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Tax Computation Worksheet—Line 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you can use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, or Form 8615, enter the amount from that form or
worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the result on the appropriate line of the form or
worksheet that you are completing.
Section A— Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax.
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable Income. Enter the amount from Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and
If line 43 is— line 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$150,150  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $ 5,493.50  $
Over $150,150 but not over
$326,450  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 13,001.00  $
Over $326,450  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 19,530.00  $
Section B— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er).Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax.
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable Income. Enter the amount from Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and
If line 43 is— line 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$119,950  $ × 25% (.25)  $  $ 6,670.00  $
Over $119,950 but not over
$182,800  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $ 10,268.50  $
Over $182,800 but not over
$326,450  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 19,408.50  $
Over $326,450  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 25,937.50  $
Section C— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax.
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable Income. Enter the amount from Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and
If line 43 is— line 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$163,225  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 9,704.25  $
Over $163,225  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 12,968.75  $
Section D— Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax.
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable Income. Enter the amount from Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and
If line 43 is— line 43 amount (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$102,800  $ × 25% (.25)  $  $ 4,502.50  $
Over $102,800 but not over
$166,450  $ × 28% (.28)  $  $  7,586.50  $
Over $166,450 but not over
$326,450  $ × 33% (.33)  $  $ 15,909.00  $
Over $326,450  $ × 35% (.35)  $  $ 22,438.00  $
Page 263

Page 266 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree withInnocent spouse relief.Gener-
most important rights as a taxpayer ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet withally, both you and your spouse are
including the examination, appeal, the examiner’s supervisor. each responsible for paying the fullRelief from certain penalties andcollection, and refund processes. amount of any tax, interest, andRepeat examinations. If we ex-interest.The IRS will waive pen- penalties due on your joint return.amined your return for the samealties when allowed by law if you However, if you qualify for innocentitems in either of the 2 previouscan show you acted reasonablyDeclaration of Taxpayer spouse relief, you may be relievedyears and proposed no change toand in good faith or relied on theRights of all or part of the joint liability. Toyour tax liability, please contact usincorrect advice of an IRS em-
as soon as possible so we can see request relief, you must file Formployee. We will waive interest that
Protection of your rights.IRS if we should discontinue the exami-is the result of certain errors or de- 8857, Request for Innocent
employees will explain and protect nation.lays caused by an IRS employee. Spouse Relief no later than 2 yearsyour rights as a taxpayer through- after the date on which the IRS firstout your contact with us. attempted to collect the tax fromAppealsExaminations (Audits) you. For example, the two-year pe-Privacy and confidentiality.
riod for filing your claim may start ifThe IRS will not disclose to anyone If you do not agree with theWe accept most taxpayers’ returns
the information you give us, except examiner’s proposed changes, youas filed. If we inquire about your the IRS applies your tax refund
as authorized by law. You have the can appeal them to the Appealsreturn or select it for examination, it from one year to the taxes that you
right to know why we are asking Office of IRS. Most differences candoes not suggest that you are dis- and your spouse owe for anotheryou for information, how we will use be settled without expensive andhonest. The inquiry or examination year. For more information on inno-it, and what will happen if you do time-consuming court trials. Yourmay or may not result in more tax. cent spouse relief, see Publicationnot provide requested information. appeal rights are explained in detailWe may close your case without 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, andin both Publication 5, Your Appealchange; or, you may receive a re-
Professional and courteous Form 8857.Rights and How To Prepare a Pro-fund.
service. If you believe that an test If You Don’t Agree, and Publi-The process of selecting a re-IRS employee has not treated you cation 556, Examination ofturn for examination usually beginsin a professional, fair, and courte- Potential Third PartyReturns, Appeal Rights, andin one of two ways. First, we useous manner, you should tell that Claims for Refund.computer programs to identify re- Contactsemployee’s supervisor. If the turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use thesupervisor’s response is not satis- Generally, the IRS will deal directlyamounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itsfactory, you should write to the IRS with you or your duly authorizedbased on information returns, suchfindings, you may be able to takedirector for your area or the centeras Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies representative. However, weyour case to the U.S. Tax Court,where you filed your return. of past examinations, or on certainU.S. Court of Federal Claims, orsometimes talk with other persons
issues identified by compliancethe U.S. District Court where youif we need information that youRepresentation. You may either projects. Second, we use informa-live. If you take your case to court,have been unable to provide, or torepresent yourself or, with propertion from outside sources that indi-the IRS will have the burden ofverify information we have re-written authorization, have some-cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad-one else represent you in your ceived. If we do contact other per-incorrect amounts. These sourcesequate records to show your taxplace. Your representative must be sons, such as a neighbor, bank,may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS,a person allowed to practice before employer, or employees, we willrecords, and individuals. If we de-and meet certain other conditions.the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- generally need to tell them limitedtermine that the information is ac-If the court agrees with you on mostfied public accountant, or enrolledcurate and reliable, we may use it information, such as your name.issues in your case and finds thatagent. If you are in an interview andto select a return for examination.our position was largely unjustified,The law prohibits us from disclos-ask to consult such a person, thenPublication 556, Examination ofyou may be able to recover some ofing any more information than iswe must stop and reschedule theReturns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigationnecessary to obtain or verify theinterview in most cases. Claims for Refund, explains thecosts. You will not be eligible toYou can have someone accom- information we are seeking. Ourrules and procedures that we followrecover these costs unless youpany you at an interview. You may need to contact other persons mayin examinations. The following sec-tried to resolve your case adminis-make sound recordings of any continue as long as there is activitytions give an overview of how wetratively, including going throughmeetings with our examination, ap- in your case. If we do contact otherconduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavepeal, or collection personnel, pro- persons, you have a right to re-us the information necessary to re-vided you tell us in writing 10 daysBy mail. We handle many exami- solve the case. quest a list of those contacted.before the meeting. nations and inquiries by mail. We
will send you a letter with either aPayment of only the correct request for more information or aCollections Refundsamount of tax. You are respon- reason why we believe a change tosible for paying only the correct Publication 594, The IRS Collec-You may file a claim for refund ifyour return may be needed. Youamount of tax due under the law— tion Process, explains your rightscan respond by mail or you can you think you paid too much tax.no more, no less. If you cannot pay and responsibilities regarding pay-request a personal interview with You must generally file the claimall of your tax when it is due, you ment of federal taxes. It describes:an examiner. If you mail us the re- within 3 years from the date youmay be able to make monthly in-quested information or provide an filed your original return or 2 yearsstallment payments. • What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may not from the date you paid the tax,taxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explainHelp with unresolved tax if you get a tax bill and whatwhichever is later. The law gener-the reasons for any changes.problems. The Taxpayer Advo- to do if you think your bill isally provides for interest on yourPlease do not hesitate to write to uscate Service can help you if you wrong. It also covers makingrefund if it is not paid within 45 daysabout anything you do not under-have tried unsuccessfully to re- installment payments, delay-of the date you filed your return orstand.solve a problem with the IRS. Your ing collection action, and sub-claim for refund. Publication 556,local Taxpayer Advocate can offer mitting an offer inBy interview. If we notify you Examination of Returns, Appealyou special help if you have a sig- compromise.that we will conduct your examina-nificant hardship as a result of a tax Rights, and Claims for Refund, has
tion through a personal interview,• IRS collection actions. It cov-problem. For more information, see more information on refunds.or you request such an interview, ers liens, releasing a lien, le-Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- If you were due a refund but youyou have the right to ask that thevies, releasing a levy,cate under How To Get Tax Help. did not file a return, you generallyexamination take place at a rea- seizures and sales, and re-
must file within 3 years from theAppeals and judicial review.If sonable time and place that is con-lease of property.
you disagree with us about the venient for both you and the IRS. If date the return was due (including
amount of your tax liability or cer-our examiner proposes any Your collection appeal rights areextensions) to get that refund.
tain collection actions, you have changes to your return, he or she explained in detail in Publication
the right to ask the Appeals Officewill explain the reasons for the1660, Collection Appeal Rights. ■
Page 264

Page 267 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved• Download forms, instruc-
tax issues, order free publications Evaluating the quality of ourtions, and publications. National Distribution Center
and forms, ask tax questions, and telephone services. To ensure• Order IRS products online. P.O. Box 8903get information from the IRS in sev- that IRS representatives give accu- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903• Research your tax questionseral ways. By selecting the method rate, courteous, and professionalonline. CD-ROM for tax prod-that is best for you, you will have answers, we use several methods• Search publications online ucts. You can orderquick and easy access to tax help. to evaluate the quality of our tele-by topic or keyword. Publication 1796, IRSphone services. One method is for
• View Internal Revenue Bul- Tax Products CD-ROM, and ob-Contacting your Taxpayer a second IRS representative to
letins (IRBs) published in the tain:Advocate. If you have attempted sometimes listen in on or record
last few years.to deal with an IRS problem unsuc- telephone calls. Another is to ask• A CD that is released twice
cessfully, you should contact your some callers to complete a short• Figure your withholding al- so you have the latest prod-Taxpayer Advocate. survey at the end of the call.lowances using our Form ucts. The first release shipsW-4 calculator.The Taxpayer Advocate inde- Walk-in. Many products in late December and the fi-pendently represents your inter-• Sign up to receive local and and services are avail- nal release ships in late Feb-ests and concerns within the IRS national tax news by email. able on a walk-in basis. ruary.by protecting your rights and • Get information on starting • Current-year forms, instruc-resolving problems that have not and operating a small busi- • Products. You can walk in to tions, and publications.been fixed through normal chan- ness. many post offices, libraries,nels. While Taxpayer Advocates • Prior-year forms, instruc-and IRS offices to pick upPhone. Many servicescannot change the tax law or make tions, and publications.certain forms, instructions,are available by phone.a technical tax decision, they can • Tax Map: an electronic re-and publications. Some IRSclear up problems that resulted offices, libraries, grocery search tool and finding aid.from previous contacts and ensure stores, copy centers, city • Tax law frequently asked• Ordering forms, instructions,that your case is given a complete and county government of- questions (FAQs).and publications. Calland impartial review. fices, credit unions, and of-1-800-829-3676 to order • Tax Topics from the IRSTo contact your Taxpayer Ad- fice supply stores have acurrent-year forms, instruc- telephone response system.vocate: collection of products avail-tions, and publications and • Fill-in, print, and save fea-able to print from a CD-ROM• Call the Taxpayer Advocate prior-year forms and instruc- tures for most tax forms.or photocopy from reproduc-toll free at tions. You should receive ible proofs. Also, some IRS • Internal Revenue Bulletins.1-877-777-4778. your order within 10 days. offices and libraries have the• Toll-free and email technical• Asking tax questions. Call• Call, write, or fax the Tax- Internal Revenue Code, reg- support.the IRS with your tax ques-payer Advocate office in your ulations, Internal Revenuetions at 1-800-829-1040.area. Bulletins, and Cumulative Buy the CD-ROM from National
• Solving problems. You can Bulletins available for re-Technical Information Service• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you get face-to-face help solving search purposes. (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders forare a tax problems every business • Services. You can walk in to$25 (no handling fee) or callTTY/TDD user. day in IRS Taxpayer Assis- your local Taxpayer Assis-1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. tance Centers. An employee tance Center every businessCD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5 han-can explain IRS letters, re- day for personal, dling fee).For more information, see Publi- quest adjustments to your face-to-face tax help. Ancation 1546, How To Get Help With account, or help you set up employee can explain IRS CD-ROM for smallUnresolved Tax Problems (now a payment plan. Call your lo- letters, request adjustments businesses. Publicationavailable in Chinese, Korean, Rus- cal Taxpayer Assistance to your tax account, or help 3207, The Small Busi-sian, and Vietnamese, in addition Center for an appointment. you set up a payment plan.ness Resource Guide CD-ROM forto English and Spanish). To find the number, go to If you need to resolve a tax2005, has a new look and en-www.irs.gov/localcontacts or problem, have questions hanced navigation features. ThisFree tax services.To find out look in the phone book about how the tax law ap- year’s CD includes:what services are available, get under United States Govern- plies to your individual tax• Helpful information, such asPublication 910, IRS Guide to Free ment, Internal Revenue return, or you’re more com-Tax Services. It contains a list of how to prepare a businessService. fortable talking with some-free tax publications and an index plan, find financing for yourone in person, visit your• TTY/TDD equipment. If youof tax topics. It also describes other business, and much more.local Taxpayer Assistancehave access to TTY/TDDfree tax information services, in- Center where you canequipment, call • All the business tax forms,cluding tax education and assis- spread out your records and1-800-829-4059 to ask tax instructions, and publica-tance programs and a list of talk with an IRS representa-questions or to order forms tions needed to successfullyTeleTax topics. tive face-to-face. No ap-and publications. manage a business.pointment is necessary, butInternet. You can ac- • TeleTax topics. Call • Tax law changes for 2005.if you prefer, you can callcess the IRS website 24 1-800-829-4477 and press 2 • IRS Tax Map to help youyour local Center and leavehours a day, 7 days a to listen to pre-recorded a message requesting an find forms, instructions, andweek, at www.irs.gov to: messages covering various appointment to resolve a tax publications by searching on• E-file your return. Find out tax topics. account issue. A representa- a keyword or topic.about commercial tax prepa- • Refund information. If you tive will call you back withinration and e-file services • Web links to various govern-would like to check the sta- 2 business days to scheduleavailable free to eligible tax-tus of your 2005 refund, call ment agencies, business as-an in-person appointment atpayers. 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 sociations, and IRSyour convenience. To find• Check the status of your for automated refund infor- organizations.the number, go to2005 refund. Click on mation or call • “Rate the Product” survey—www.irs.gov/localcontacts orWhere’s My Refund. Be sure 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to look in the phone book your opportunity to suggestto wait at least 6 weeks from wait at least 6 weeks from under United States Govern- changes for future editions.the date you filed your return the date you filed your returnment, Internal Revenue(3 weeks if you filed elec- (3 weeks if you filed elec- An updated version of this CD isService.tronically). Have your 2005 tronically). Have your 2005 available each year in early April.tax return available because tax return available because Mail. You can send your You can get a free copy by callingyou will need to know your you will need to know your order for forms, instruc- 1-800-829-3676 or by visitingsocial security number, your social security number, your tions, and publications to www.irs.gov/smallbiz.filing status, and the exact filing status, and the exact the address below and receive a
whole dollar amount of your whole dollar amount of your response within 10 business days
refund. refund. after your request is received.
■
Page 265

Page 268 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Accumulation distribution of Expenses not deductible: Alcoholic beverages:
trusts: Foster care prior to, no IRA prohibited transactions10% tax for early withdrawal
Tax on....................1 9 9 charitable in ......................1 1 9from IRA or retirement plan
deduction.............1 5 4Accuracy-related Aliens ......................2 1 0(See Early withdrawal from
No charitable deductionpenalties.................. 1 8 Dual-status (See Dual-statusdeferred interest account,
f o r ...................1 5 5taxpayers)ACRS (Accelerated Costsubheading: Tax on)
Foreign child..............2 4 7 Filing required............... 6Recovery System):10-year tax option........... 7 3 Medical and dental expenses of Nonresident (See NonresidentRental property:401(k) plans: adopted child...........1 3 5 aliens)Alternative minimumTax treatment of Taxpayer identification Resident (See Resident aliens)t a x .................... 6 8contributions............. 4 6 number ..............12, 33 Alimony ............32, 124-126Activities not for profit...... 8 5403(b) plans: Taxpayer identification numbersDeath of recipientAddress:Rollovers.............73, 117 (TINs)..................2 1 0 spouse .................1 2 5Change of ................. 1 6457 plans (See Section 457 Advance earned income Decrease in amount andCorrecting label............ 1 5deferred compensation plans) credit............... 2 ,  7 ,  2 4 1recapture rule...........1 2 6Foreign.................... 1 5529 plans (See Qualified tuition Filing requirements (Table Deduction.................1 2 6Label...................... 1 5programs) 1-3)...................... 8 Difference from one year toNo label received........... 1 5591/2 rule....................1 2 0 Age: another of more thanP.O. box................... 1 560 day rule.................1 1 7 Children’s investments (See $15,000 ..............1 2 6Service Centers............ 1 5701/2 rule....................1 1 3 Children, subheading: Definition of...............1 2 4Adjusted basis...........90-91 Investment income of child Form 1040 to be used:Alternative motor vehicle under age 14) Deduction for amountcredit.................... 9 1A Form 1040EZ, taxpayer under paid..................1 2 6Clean-fuel vehicle and refuelingAbandonment of home .....1 0 1 65 may use............... 6 Income received, reportingproperty................. 9 1Abortion: Gross income and filing o f ....................1 2 6Decreases to basis......... 9 0Deductibility as medical requirements (Table Recapture..............1 2 6Depreciation............... 9 0expense ................1 3 6 1-1)...................... 5 Instruments executed afterEasements ................ 9 1Abroad, citizens traveling or IRAs: 1984 ...................1 2 4Electric vehicle credit....... 9 1working (See Citizens outside Contribution cutoff at age Alimony requirements (TableEnergy conservation subsidiesU.S.;  Foreign employment) 70 1/2 ..................1 1 3 18-1).................1 2 5exclusion................ 9 1 Distribution prior to age Instruments executed beforeAbsence, temporary.....26, 28 Examples (Table 13-1)..... 9 0 591/2 ..................1 2 0 1985 ...................1 2 4Academic period (See name of Gifts....................... 9 2 Distribution required at age Joint return of spouses notbenefit) Home sale (See Sale of home) 701/2 .............118, 120 allowed.................1 2 4Accelerated Cost Recovery Improvements.............. 9 0 Pension distributions required atJointly owned home.......1 2 4System (ACRS): Increases to basis.......... 9 0 age 701/2 ................. 7 5 Separate residencesRental property: Local assessments......... 9 0 Retirement plan recipients over i n ....................1 2 5Alternative minimum Sales of property........... 9 4 age 75 .................. 7 1 Taxes and insurancet a x .................... 6 8Section 179 deduction...... 9 0 Roth IRAs ...........121, 123 premiums ............1 2 4Accelerated death Adjusted gross income (AGI): Standard deduction for age 65 Life insurancebenefits...............81, 82 (See also Deductions).....1 2 7 or older.................1 3 1 premiums ...............1 2 4Accident insurance.......... 4 3 Business expenses, limit on Mortgage payments.......1 2 4Age test..................... 2 6Cafeteria plans............. 4 8 deduction...............1 8 1 Interest deduction.......1 4 4Agents (See alsoLong-term care.........43, 48 Charitable contribution Payments designated as notFiduciaries)................ 9 6Accidental death deduction limit..........1 5 7 alimony.................1 2 5Income paid to............. 1 1benefits................... 4 4Itemized deduction Payments must be inSigning return.............. 1 3limit...............144, 184Accidents, car..............1 6 0 cash....................1 2 4AGI (See Adjusted gross incomeMedical and dental expensesValue determination.......1 6 2 Payments not included(AGI))and limit ofWillful negligence or intentional a s......................1 2 4Agricultural workers (Seededuction..........134, 138act as cause............1 6 0 Payments to thirdFarmworkers)Modified (See Modified adjustedAccountable plans for party..............124, 125Agriculture (See Farming)gross income (MAGI))employee Penalty for failure to provideAircraft:Retirement savings contributionreimbursements .....177, 178 social security number ofCharitable gift of, deduction forcredit.................... 2 0Accountants: recipient................1 2 6fair market value........1 5 6Adjustments ...............1 9 9Basis to include fees of..... 8 9 Recapture rule............1 2 6Airline club dues:CPA review courses.......1 8 6Administrators, estate (See Recipient reporting of......1 2 6Not entertainmentPreparers of tax returns..... 1 3 Executors and administrators) Reporting of income....80, 85,expenses ...............1 7 1Accounting methods ........ 1 1 126Adopted child........25, 26, 29
Airplanes, donations of......1 ,Accrual method (See Accrual Spouse defined for purposesEarned Income Credit.....2 3 6
155method taxpayers) o f ......................1 2 4Adoption:
Airport transportation:Cash method (See Cash Spouses cannot be members ofATIN .................12, 210
Business-related travelmethod taxpayers) same household........1 2 5Child tax credit (See also Child
expense ................1 6 8Change of: Substitute payments.......1 2 5tax credit)...............2 2 1
Depreciation, to deduct Alaska: Taxes and insurance paid onCredit Employer’s assistance
unclaimed amount..... 6 8 Standard meal home owned as tenants inprogram ................2 4 6
allowance...............1 6 9 common ................1 2 4Accounting periods......... 1 1 Credits............7 ,  155, 246
Termination of and recaptureCalendar year........ 9 ,  11, 43 Alaska Permanent FundMarried filing
rule....................1 2 6Change in, standard deduction dividends ................. 8 5separately............. 2 0
not allowed.............1 3 1 Child’s dividends..........1 4 9Alternative filing methods:Taking..................2 4 7
Fiscal year..........11, 39, 41 Income from .......... 6 ,  7 ,  6 3Electronic (See E-file)Employer assistance....... 4 4
Fringe benefits............. 4 3 Investment income not toEmployer’s assistance Alternative minimum tax
include.................1 4 9Accrual method program .................. 1 (AMT) ....................1 9 9
taxpayers ................. 1 1Exception for adopted Alcohol rehabilitation centers: Accelerated depreciation
Taxes paid during tax year, child ....................1 3 5Deductibility of medical and ..................... 6 8
deduction of............1 4 0 Exemption for child........1 5 5 expense ................1 3 6Child’s tax, figuring of......2 0 6
Page 266

Page 269 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trade of insurance policies andAttachment of wages........ 1 1Bargain sales:Alternative minimum tax (AMT)
annuities................ 9 5 As charitableAttachments to return....... 1 2(Cont.)
Unrecovered contributions ............1 5 7Credit for prior year tax....2 4 8 Attorneys:
investment..............1 9 3 Basis of purchase.......... 9 1Exempt-interest Bar review courses........1 8 6
Withholding.........12, 37, 70 Barter income:dividends................ 6 3 Attorneys’ fees........192, 194
Annulled marriages: Definition of bartering....... 8 0Filing requirements (Table Basis to include............ 8 9
Filing status................ 1 9 Form 1099-B...........40, 801-3)...................... 8 Social security and railroad
Incentive stock option........ 7 Anthrax incidents (See Terrorist Basis:retirement benefits,
Payments ................... 7 attacks) Adjusted basis............. 9 0deductions for............ 7 9
Allocation between businessTitle to property, for preparation,Amateur sports organizations: Antiques (See Collectibles)
and personal use......... 8 9filing, etc................. 8 9Charitable contributions Appliances:
Bad debts.................. 9 9t o ......................1 5 1 Audits:Deterioration and damage, not
Bargain purchases......... 9 1Travel expensecasualty loss............1 6 0Ambulance service personnel:
Bonds ..................... 9 3records.................1 7 7Life insurance proceeds when Appraisal fees..............1 9 1
Cost basis................. 8 9death in line of duty...... 8 2 Auto insurance:Donated property..........1 5 5
IRAs for nondeductibleMedical expenses covered by,Not deductible asAmended returns (See also
contributions.....116, 119not deductible...........1 3 6interest.................1 4 8Form 1040X)............... 1 6
Definition of................ 8 9Real estate transactions, whenItemized deduction, change to Automatic extension of time to
Gifts....................... 9 2required by lender........ 9 0standard deduction......1 3 2 file......................9 ,  1 0
Home sales (See Sale of home)Form 4868 .................. 9Standard deduction, change toAppraisals: Improvements to realitemized deductions.....1 3 2 Casualty or theft Automatic investment services: estate................... 9 0losses.............161, 162 Holding period, determinationAmerican citizens abroad (See Inheritance................. 9 2o f ....................... 9 8Citizens outside U.S.) Archer MSAs ................ 8 7 Involuntary conversion...... 9 1Employment (See Foreign Contributions............... 4 4Automobiles (See Cars) Like-kind exchanges........ 9 5employment) Filing requirements (Table Awards  (See Prizes and awards) Other than cost......91-93, 951-3)...................... 8American Indians (See Indians) Away-from-home travel (See Points not to be included.... 9 0Medical expenses paid forAmerican Samoa: Travel and transportation Property received fordecedent from..........1 3 6Income from................ 6 expenses) services................. 9 1Not deductible as medicalAmortization: Real estate................ 8 9expense ................1 3 6Bond premiums, treatment Restricted property......... 9 1BArmed forces (See alsoo f ......................1 5 0 Stock or stock rights........ 6 2Baby-sitting (See also DomesticVeterans’ organizations;AMT  (See Alternative minimum Tax-exempt obligations:help)...................... 4 2Reservists; Veterans’tax (AMT)) Bonds ................... 9 3benefits).....47, 151, 152, 173Back pay, award for......... 4 2Annuities: (See also Transfers betweenCombat zone: Emotional distress damagesRollovers).................. 7 3 spouses .............92, 96Extension to file return.... 1 0 under Title VII of Civil RightsCost computation.......... 7 1 Beetles:Signing return for Act of 1964.............. 8 6Credit for elderly or disabled Damage or destruction to treesspouse ................ 2 0Backup withholding.....37, 40,persons ................. 7 0 and plants, when casualtyDependency allotments..... 2 9 52Decedent’s unrecovered loss....................1 6 0Disability pay............... 4 7 Dividend income........... 6 0investment in............ 1 2 Beneficiaries (See EstateDisability pensions......... 4 8 Penalties.................. 3 7Early distributions from..... 7 4 beneficiaries;  TrustGI Bill benefits............. 3 1Bad check penalty.......... 1 4Deferred annuity beneficiaries)Military...................1 9 1Bad debts:contracts.............. 7 4 Bequests (See EstateMilitary quarters Bank deposit, loss due to bank’sEstimated tax.............. 7 0 beneficiaries;  Gifts;allotments............... 2 9 insolvency orExclusion limit.............. 7 1 Inheritance)Naval officers on permanent bankruptcy..............1 6 1Form 1099-R............... 4 0 Bingo .................152, 155duty aboard ship........1 6 6 Reporting on Schedule DGeneral Rule: Birth control pills...........1 3 6Permanent duty (Form 1040)..........1 6 1Annuity starting before overseas ...............1 6 6 Birth of child................ 2 6Claim for refund........17, 99November 19, 1996.... 7 1 Real estate taxes when Head of household, qualifyingNonbusiness............... 9 9Nonqualified plans and receiving housing person to file as......22, 23Recovery .................. 8 2qualified plans for allowance..........142, 144 Social Security Number to beReporting of................ 9 9recipients over 75 Rehabilitative program obtained ................. 3 3Short-term capital loss...... 9 9years.................. 7 1 payments ................ 4 7 Birth of dependent.......... 2 9Baggage:Purchased annuities...... 7 1 Reserves .......181, 189, 193 Blackmail:Business-related travelSurvivor’s annuity........ 7 5 Retirees’ pay: Losses due to.............1 6 0expense ................1 6 8Guaranteed payments...... 7 1 Taxable income.......... 4 7 Blind persons:Balance due................1 9 9IRAs as...................1 1 3 Withholding.............. 3 4 Exemption fromBankruptcy:Joint return................ 7 1 Uniforms..................1 9 1 withholding.............. 3 6Canceled debt not deemed toWorksheet............... 7 2 Wages ..................... 4 7 Guide dogs, deductible asbe income............... 8 1Loans from plan............ 7 0Art works: medical expense........1 3 6Financial institution’sLump-sum distributions..... 7 3 As capital assets........... 9 7 Impairment-related workbankruptcy causingMultiple plan benefits...... 7 0 , Capital gains or losses from expenses, deductiondeductible loss..........1 6 171 sale or trade of..........1 0 6 f o r......................1 3 8Reporting of............1 6 5Partly taxable payments.... 7 1 Artists, performing (See Standard deduction for....1 3 1Banks:Purchased annuities........ 7 1 Performing artists) Blood banks:Automatic investment service,Reporting of................ 7 1Assessments, local (See Local No charitable deduction fordetermination of holdingRetirement annuities (See also assessments) blood donations to......152,period................... 9 8Retirement plans)........ 7 0 155Assistance, tax (See Tax help) IRAs with.................1 1 3Rollovers.................. 7 3
Blue books to determine fairAssumption of mortgage.... 8 9 Losses on deposits, whenSale of..................... 9 8 market value.............1 5 6Fees not included in casualty losses ......98, 161Gain as ordinary
basis.................... 9 0 Reporting of............1 6 5Boarding houses............ 6 6income ................ 7 1
Money market accounts.... 6 2At-risk rules: Boats:Simplified method to calculate
Rental property............. 6 9Bar associations: Charitable gift of, deduction fortax-free part of annuity
Charitable contributions fair market value ........1 5 6Athletic events:payment ................. 7 1
t o ......................1 5 5Charitable contributions, Boats, donations of..... 1 ,  1 5 5Survivor’s annuity........ 7 5
amount deductible.......1 5 2Bar employees:Worksheet for Bona fide business purpose:
Tips (See Tip income)computation........... 7 1ATIN (Adoption taxpayer Travel expenses..........1 6 8
Survivor annuities.......... 7 5 identification number)..... 1 2Bar review courses.........1 8 6 Work-related education....1 8 4
Page 267

Page 270 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bonds: Sales or exchanges........ 9 4 Tax rates.................1 0 6Rebates ................... 8 5
Like-kind exchanges..... 9 5 Sales of property for........ 9 5Maximum capital gain ratesAdjusted basis for.......... 9 3
(Table 16-1)..........1 0 6Amortization of Business tax credits: Cash method taxpayers ..... 1 1
Total net loss.............1 0 6premium ...........150, 192 Claim for refund............ 1 7 Bad debts.................. 9 9
Undistributed gains........1 0 6As capital assets........... 9 7 Points, deduction of.......1 4 6Business use of home......1 9 0
Credit for tax on.....62, 249Convertible bonds.......... 9 5 Real estate transactions, tax
allocation...............1 4 1Discounted: Car expenses:
Taxes paid during tax year,CCapital gain or loss....... 9 7 Depreciation (See Depreciation
deduction of............1 4 0of car)Issued at discount.......... 5 7Cafeteria plans.............. 4 8
Worthless securities andMarket discount bonds...... 9 8 Car pools ..................1 7 4Calendar year taxpayers:
negotiable promissoryOriginal issue discount...... 5 7 Carrybacks:Accounting periods...... 9 ,  1 1 ,
notes.................... 9 4Redemption of............. 9 4 43 Business tax credit
Cash rebates................ 8 5Retirement of..........74, 94 Filing due date.............. 9 carrybacks............... 1 7
Casualties..................1 0 4Sale of..................... 5 7California Nonoccupational Carryovers:
Casualty insurance:Savings.................... 5 4Disability Benefit Capital loss...............1 0 6
Premiums not in propertySold at premium, computation Fund .....................1 4 1 Worksheet..............1 0 6
basis.................... 9 0of adjusted basis......... 9 3Campaign contributions.... 8 5 , Charitable contributions, when
Reimbursements from...... 8 5State or local government, 152, 155 deduction exceeds
tax-exempt.............. 9 7 Casualty losses.......160-165,adjusted-gross-incomePresidential Election Campaign
Tax-exempt................ 5 7 191, 192limits...................1 5 8Fund .................... 1 2
Adjusted basis inInvestment interest........1 4 8Bonuses .............36, 42, 88 Campaign expenses ........1 9 3
property....90, 91, 161, 165Cars (See also Travel andBookkeeping  (See Canada:
Amount of loss............1 6 1transportation; StandardRecordkeeping requirements) Contributions to charitable
Appraisals...........161, 162mileage rates).....45, 88, 166,organizations in....152, 155Books to determine fair market
Bank deposit, loss due to bank’s174value.....................1 6 2Canada, resident of......... 2 5
insolvency orAccidents resulting in casualtyBorrowed funds (See also Cancellation of debt: bankruptcy..............1 6 1loss....................1 6 0Loans)................70, 149 Exceptions to treatment as Costs:Value determination.....1 6 2Used for charitable income .................. 8 1 Cleaning up or makingWillful negligence orcontributions, deduction Candidates for public office: repairs...............1 6 2intentional act asf o r......................1 5 7Contributions to, no charitable Photographs andcause ................1 6 0Bottled water...............1 3 6 deduction for.......152, 155 appraisals............1 6 2Actual expenses..........1 7 4Boy Scouts: Capital assets: Deductible losses.........1 6 0Advertising displays on....1 7 4Charitable contributions Coal and iron ore........... 8 4 $100 rule...............1 6 4Allowances fromt o ......................1 5 2Definition of................ 9 7 When to take (Tableemployers..............1 7 8Breach of contract: Capital expenses............ 3 0 25-2).................1 6 5As capital assets........... 9 7Damages as income........ 8 6Capital gains: Deduction limits...........1 6 4Blue book to determine fairemployment...............1 8 9 Total net gain.............1 0 6 For personal property (Tablemarket value............1 5 6Bribes....................... 8 5Capital gains or losses..... 9 7 , 25-1).................1 6 5Books to determine fair market99, 105, 107Bribes and illegal Definition of casualty......1 6 0value...................1 6 2payments ................1 9 3Bad debts as short-term capital Disasters (See Disaster relief)Business and personal use,loss..................... 9 9Brokers ..................... 1 1 Employer’s emergency disasterallocation between.....175,Carryover of..............1 0 6Form 1099-B...........40, 94 fund....................1 6 2176Worksheet..............1 0 6IRAs with.................1 1 3 Fair market value ofBusiness-related travelCharacter of gain........... 9 7Commissions ......113, 114 property................1 6 1expenses ...............1 6 8Character of loss........... 9 7Receiving dividends, reporting Form 4684 to be filed......1 6 0Car pools.................1 7 4Child’s distributions andon Form 1099-MISC...... 6 0 Insurance proceeds, treatmentCharitable gift of, deduction fordividends, reportingBurglary: o f ......................1 6 2fair market value........1 5 6o f .................149, 202 Net operating losses.......1 6 5Losses due to.............1 6 0 Charitable organization service,Collectibles...............1 0 6 Nondeductible losses......1 6 0Burial expenses (See use for.............154, 158Deductions...............1 0 6 Proof of loss..............1 6 1Funerals).................1 9 3 Depreciation..............1 7 5Limit on.................1 0 6 Property used partly forBusiness associates (See also Donations of........... 1 ,  1 5 5Married filing business and partly forEntertainment Electric vehicles (See Electricseparately............. 2 0 personal purposes......1 6 4expenses) ...........168, 170 cars)Distributions............... 6 2 Reimbursement ...........1 6 2Business travel to meet....1 7 2 Employer-provided......... 4 4Form 1040 or 1040A to be Reporting of gain orTravel expenses of, paying Fixed and variable rateused .............7 ,  63, 106 loss....................1 6 5f o r......................1 6 8 (FAVR) .................1 7 9Hobbies, sales from Single casualty on multipleBusiness expenses: (See also Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how tocollections............... 8 7 properties...............1 6 3Entertainment fill out..................1 8 0Holding period, determination Cellular telephone..........1 8 9expenses) ...........168, 170 Hauling tools oro f ....................... 9 8 Cemeteries:Job search expenses....... 8 7 instruments.............1 7 4How to report.............1 0 5 Charitable contributionsMeal expenses (See Meal and Interest on loans, notInstallment sales and......1 0 5 t o ......................1 5 1lodging expenses) deductible..............1 4 9Lump-sum distributions from Certificate, mortgageReimbursements .......36, 42 Leased vehicles...........1 7 5pensions and credit....................2 4 7Returning excess for Medical transportation....136,annuities................ 7 3 Certificates of deposit (CDs)business expenses.... 3 6 , 137Mutual funds paying........ 6 2 (See also Individual retirement179 Parking (See Parking fees)Net capital gain.......97, 106 arrangements (IRAs))...... 5 8 ,Travel (See Travel and Personal property taxes on,Included as investment 112transportation expenses) deduction of............1 4 3income ...............1 4 9
Work-related education....1 8 6 Chambers of commerce:Reporting of...............1 7 7Net long-term capital
Charitable contributionsBusiness organizations: Table 26-3 showing forms toloss....................1 0 6
t o .................152, 155be used ..............1 8 0Charitable contributions Sale of personal items...... 8 8
Entertainment expenses fort o ......................1 5 5 Sale, trade-in, or otherSale or trade of property held
attending meetings......1 7 1disposition..............1 7 5Business property: more than 1 year....98, 105
Change of address.......... 1 6Section 179 deductions....1 7 5As gift, adjusted basis Schedule D...............1 0 5
Work-related education, Change of name .........11, 41f o r....................... 9 2Section 1250 gains from sale of
transportation for........1 8 7Basis for depreciation....... 9 3 real property........97, 107 Chaplains:
Cash:State or local governmentProperty use changed to, Life insurance proceeds when
bonds, tax-exempt....... 9 7adjusted basis for........ 9 3 Dividends paid as.......... 6 0 death in line of duty...... 8 2
Page 268

Page 271 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Charitable Written acknowledgment from Credit for (See Child and Citizens outside U.S.:
contributions........151-159 recipient dependent care credit;  Child Business travel outside
organization.......151, 158 tax credit) U.S.....................1 7 0$250 or more, recordkeeping
requirements............1 5 8 Self-employedCharitable deduction for living Custody of................. 2 6
persons ..............1 7 0expenses ................1 5 7$500 or more noncash Death of child:
contribution: Standard mealCharity benefit events: Head of household, qualifying
allowance............1 6 9Form 8283 to be Deduction amount for charitable person to file as....22, 23
used .................1 5 9 Earned income exclusion.... 2contributions............1 5 2 Deductions...............2 0 5Bargain sales as..........1 5 7 Employment (See ForeignCheck-writing fees.........1 9 3 Dividends of (See this heading: employment)Benefit received as result ofChecklists: Investment income of child Extension of time to file..... 1 0contribution........152, 155 Medical and dental expense under age 14) Filing requirements.......... 5Capital gain property as deductions (Table Earnings of................. 6donation................1 5 6 Withholding from IRA21-1)...................1 3 6Election to use parent’s return,distributions.............1 1 9Limit on deduction.......1 5 7Checks: effect of making.........2 0 1Carryover of excess Civic associations:As charitable Inclusion of child’s income ondeduction...............1 5 8 Charitable contributionscontributions............1 5 7 parent’s return (FigureCash, recordkeeping t o ......................1 5 5Canceled checks as evidence of 31-A).................2 0 1requirements............1 5 8 Contributions to, no charitabletravel expenses.........1 7 5 Filing requirements.......... 6 deduction for............1 5 2Deductions: Constructive receipt of...... 1 1 As dependents (Table30% limit of adjusted gross Civil defense organizations:Payment of tax............. 1 4 1-2).................... 6income ...............1 5 7 Charitable contributionsPenalty if not honored...... 1 4 Gifts to...............52, 20550% limit of adjusted gross t o ......................1 5 2Child and dependent care Income, calculation of.....2 0 2income ...............1 5 7 Civil service retirementcredit...................... 7 Capital gainsExamples of (Table benefits................... 7 0Due diligence.............2 1 2 distributions..........2 0 224-1).................1 5 2 Civil suits (See also DamagesEarned income............2 1 0Limits on..........152, 157 Investment income of child from lawsuits).............. 8 6Full-time student..........2 1 0 under age 14........... 6 0 ,Year to claim Civil tax penalties (SeeMarried filing separately.... 2 0 201-206deduction.............1 5 7 Penalties)Payments to relatives......2 1 1Definition of...............1 5 1 Dependent filing requirementsClean-fuel vehicles.......... 9 1Child born alive............. 2 6 (Table 1-2)............. 6Dwelling unit used as Clergy........................ 6Child care:home .................... 6 7 Form 8615, use of (Figure Contributions that can be spentBaby-sitting................ 4 2Fair market value of property 31-B).................2 0 5 as individual wishes, notCare providers............. 4 2contributions......152, 156, General rules...........2 0 1 deductible charitableCredit (See Child and157 Interest and dividends.....6 , contribution.............1 5 4dependent care credit)Recordkeeping 7, 60 Housing ................... 4 6Expenses .................. 3 1requirements.........1 5 9 Investment income Real estate taxes whenNursing care for healthy baby,Gifts to reduce public defined...............2 0 5 receiving housingnot deductible as medicaldebt..................... 1 5 allowance.......142, 144Parental information,expense ................1 3 6Itemized deductions, limit Life insurance proceeds whenproviding of...........2 0 5Child custody............... 2 6o n......................1 5 1 chaplain died in line ofParents’ election to report onChild support............... 8 6Large quantities of duty..................... 8 2Form 1040.....6 ,  149, 201Alimony, differenceitems...................1 5 6 Pensions .................. 4 6Trust income............2 0 5from...............124, 125Less than $250, recordkeeping Special income rules....... 4 6Kidnapped ................. 2 6Child support under pre-1985requirements............1 5 8 Clerical help, deductibilityagreement ................ 3 2 Net investment income, figuringNoncash contributions, of ........................1 9 1o f ......................2 0 5Child tax credit......... 6 ,  7 ,  2 5recordkeeping Clients (See also EntertainmentNontaxable income........2 0 5Additional credit...........2 2 2requirements............1 5 8 expenses) ...........168, 170Amount of credit...........2 2 1 Property received as gift,Nonqualified Business travel to meet....1 7 2Claiming, procedure for....2 2 1 income from............2 0 5organizations...........1 5 5 Travel expenses of, payingForm 8812, completed.....2 2 2 Signing return, parent forNot deductible............1 5 4 f o r......................1 6 8Limits.................20, 221 child..................... 1 3Ordinary income property as Closing costs:Modified adjusted grossdonation................1 5 6 Standard deduction for . . . 131,Real propertyincome ...............2 2 1 132Payment partly for goods or transactions............. 8 9Married filing separately.... 2 0services................1 5 1 Stillborn................... 2 6Sale of home..............1 0 1Qualifying child............2 2 1Property contributions.....1 5 5 Support of (See Child support) Clothing:Withholding, checkingDecreased in value......1 5 6 Tax credit (See Child tax credit)Military...................1 9 1amount .................2 2 2Increased in value.......1 5 6 Tentative tax figured at parent’sMoth damage, not casualtyChild, qualifying............. 2 5Publication 78, list of qualified tax rate.................2 0 6 loss....................1 6 0Childcare:organizations...........1 5 1 Transporting school Uniforms:Credit....................2 0 8Qualified organizations....1 5 1 children.................. 8 8 Charitable organizationProvider:Types of................1 5 1 Chronic illness: requiring, deduction for costTaxpayer identificationWritten statement Accelerated payment of life and upkeep of........1 5 4number ...............2 1 1from..................1 5 3 insurance proceeds (See Used clothing, charitableChildren (See alsoRecordkeeping Accelerated death benefits) deduction for fair marketAdoption).............44, 155requirements............1 5 8 Long-term care (See Long-term value...................1 5 6Additional credit on child taxSchedule A (Form 1040) to be care insurance contracts) Clothing, work.............1 9 0credit...................2 2 2used for deductions.....1 5 9 Church employees: Club dues and membershipAdoption (See Adopted child)Time of making contribution, Filing requirements (Table fees:Baby-sitters................ 4 2how to determine........1 5 7 1-3)...................... 8 EntertainmentBirth of child:To individuals, not expenses ...............1 7 1Churches, temples, etc.:deductible.........152, 154 Head of household, qualifying
Co-owners:Charitable contributionsperson to file as....22, 23Token items given by
Dwelling unit used as home byt o ......................1 5 2Social Security Number to berecipients...............1 5 3
co-owner, rental income and50% limit onobtained............... 3 3Volunteers, deductibility of expense allocation....... 6 6deduction.............1 5 7Care providers (See also Childcontributions (Table
Coal and iron ore............ 8 4Convention delegates,care).................... 4 224-2)...................1 5 4
Coins (See Collectibles)deduction of unreimbursedChild’s tax, figuring of......2 0 6Written acknowledgement from
expenses ...............1 5 4Collectibles:recipient Alternative minimum
organization............1 5 8 t a x ...................2 0 6Citizen or resident test...... 2 5 A s  capital assets........... 9 7
Page 269

Page 272 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Period of ownership and Country clubs: Mortgage interest (SeeCollectibles: (Cont.)
u s e.....................1 0 3 Mortgage interest credit)Charitable contributionsGains or losses from sale or
Nonrefundable credits.....2 4 6t o ......................1 5 5trade of.................1 0 6Confidential information:
Other than those on FormDues:IRA investment in.........1 1 9 Privacy Act and paperwork
1040A, Form 1040 to beCharitable deduction notreduction information...... 2Collective bargaining
used ..................... 8allowed..........152, 153Travel expenses and......1 7 6agreements ............... 3 6
Refundable..........246, 248Entertainment expenseConservation:College professor: Retirement savings contributiondeduction notCharitable contribution toResearch expenses.......1 9 0 (See Retirement savingsallowed...............1 7 1promote, recordkeepingColleges and universities: contribution credit)requirement.............1 5 9Coupon bonds .............. 5 8Charitable contributions Cremation:Constructive receipt of Court awards and damagest o ......................1 5 2 Not deductible as medicalincome ................11, 58 ( See Damages from lawsuits)50% limit on expense ................1 3 6Contributions (See also Cousin ...................... 2 9deduction.............1 5 7 Criminal prosecutions:Campaign contributions; Coverdell ESAs:Athletic events, amount Travel expenses for federalCharitable Additional tax on..........1 9 9deductible............1 5 2 staff....................1 6 7contributions)......15, 67, 85, Filing requirements (TableEducation costs (See Qualified Cruises:151-159, 152, 155 1-3)...................... 8tuition programs;  Tuition) Travel expenses whenPolitical...................1 9 4Education costs: CPAs  (See Accountants) incidental businessRetirement (See specific type ofEmployer-provided Credit card payment of taxes: activities................1 7 0plan)educational assistance Estimated tax..........39, 40 Work-related education,Controlled corporations:(See Educational Credit cards: deduction ofNontaxable stock purchaseassistance) Annual fees, not expenses ...............1 8 7o f ....................... 9 5Combat zone: deductible..............1 4 9Custodial fees..............1 9 2Related partyExtension to file return...... 1 0 Benefits, taxability of Custody of child............. 2 6transactions............. 9 6Signing return for insurance................ 8 6Customers  (See alsoConventions:spouse .................. 2 0 Charitable contributions EntertainmentDelegates:Comments on publication.... 3 charged to..............1 5 7 expenses) ...........168, 170Deduction of unreimbursed Finance charges, notCommission drivers: Business travel to meet....1 7 2expenses.............1 5 4 deductible..............1 4 9Deduction of expenses....1 7 7 Travel expenses of, payingTravel expenses........1 7 0 Payment of taxes..... 2 ,  10, 14Commissions ............... 3 6 f o r......................1 6 8Travel expenses..........1 7 0 Convenience fee of serviceAdvance ................... 4 2Work-related education, providers.............. 1 4IRAs with brokers....113, 114 deduction of travel expenses Installment DProperty basis to include when for overseas agreements............ 1 5buyer pays............... 8 9 Daily allowance (See Per diem)conventions.............1 8 7Credit for child and dependentSharing of (kickbacks)...... 8 7 Damage to property (SeeConversion (See specific care expenses ...........2 0 0Unearned, deduction for Casualty losses)retirement or IRA plan) Credit for the elderly or therepayment of............. 4 2 Disasters (See Disaster relief)Convertible stocks and disabled..................2 0 0Commodities: Damages ...................1 8 9bonds ..................... 9 5Nontaxable payments.....2 1 8Derivative financial Damages from lawsuits..... 8 6Cooperative housing: Credit reports:instruments.............. 9 7 Medical expenses as part ofDwelling unit used as Costs not included in propertyCommon law marriage ...... 1 9 settlement..............1 3 8home .................... 6 4 basis.................... 9 0Communist organizations: Dating your return........... 1 3Mortgage interest Fees for, notCharitable contributions Daycare centers (See Child andstatements..............1 4 8 deductible..............1 4 9t o ......................1 5 5 dependent care credit;  ChildReal estate taxes, deduction Credits (See alsoCommunity property ..... 5 ,  5 5 , care)o f ......................1 4 1Adoption)..........7 ,  198, 20092 Taxes that are deductible De minimis benefits......... 4 4Alternative minimum tax, creditAlimony, difference (Table 22-1)..........1 4 2 Deadlines (See Due dates)for prior year tax........2 4 8from....................1 2 4Sale or trade of: Death (See Decedents)Capital gains, undistributed,IRAs......................1 1 3 Form 1099-S to Death benefits:credit for tax on.....62, 249Married filing separately.... 2 1 report................1 0 5 Accelerated............81, 82Changing claim............ 1 6Medical and dental Period of ownership and Life insurance proceeds (SeeChild and dependent care (Seeexpenses ...............1 3 4 u s e ..................1 0 2 Life insurance)Child and dependent careCommuting expenses .....173, Cooperatives: Public safety officers who diedcredit)194 Patronage dividends........ 6 3 or were killed in line of duty,Child tax (See Child tax credit)Employer-provided commuter Copyrights.................. 9 7 tax exclusion............. 8 2Earned income (See Earnedvehicle.................. 4 5Infringement damages...... 8 6 Death of child............... 2 6Income Credit)Compensation  (See also Wages Royalties .................. 8 3 Death of dependent......... 2 9Education (See Educationand salaries)............... 4 2Corporations (See also S Debt instruments (See Bonds orcredits)Defined for IRA corporations)............... 8 2 Notes)Electric vehicles (See Electricpurposes ...............1 1 3 Controlled corporations.... 9 5 , cars) Debts (See also BadDefined for Roth IRA 96 debts).................17, 82Empowerment zone andpurposes ...............1 2 1 Director fees as Canceled (See Cancellation ofrenewal communityEmployee .................. 4 2 self-employment debt)employment credit.......1 9 8income .................. 8 6Miscellaneous Nonrecourse............... 8 0Excess withholding of socialcompensation............ 4 2 Reorganizations and nontaxable Paid by another............ 1 1security and railroadtrade of stock............ 9 5Nonemployee .............. 8 6 Payoff of debt included in salesretirement tax (See Excess
Corrections (See Errors)Computation of tax.......... 1 2 transaction............... 9 5withholding credit)
Equal amounts............. 1 2Cosmetic surgery: Public, gifts to reduce....... 1 5For the disabled...........2 1 7
Negative amounts.......... 1 2 Not deductible as medical Recourse .................. 8 0For the elderly............2 1 7
expense ................1 3 6Rounding off dollars........ 1 2 Refund offset against.....8 ,  1 3Foreign tax (See Foreign tax
Cosmetics:Computer ..................1 8 9 Deceased taxpayers (Seecredit)
Not deductible as medical Decedents)Condemnation of Fuel from a nonconventional
expense ................1 3 6property.............104, 160 source ..................1 9 8Decedents (See also Executors
Cost basis................... 8 9Health coverage tax (SeeBasis computation.......... 9 1 and administrators).......... 5
IRAs for nondeductible Health coverage tax credit)Disaster areas, Capital loss of.............1 0 6
contributions.......116, 119 Hope scholarship........... 2 0government-ordered Deceased spouse........... 5
demolition of unsafe Cost-of-living Lifetime learning (See Lifetime Personal exemption ...... 2 4
home ...................1 6 0allowances................ 4 3 learning credit) Due dates .................. 9
Page 270

Page 273 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employed persons: Alien dependents ....12, 33 Terrorist attack as cause ofDecedents (Cont.)
injury, disability paymentsHealth insurance Standard deduction for....1 3 2Filing requirements.......... 5
excluded frompremiums ............1 3 9Funeral expenses.........1 5 4 Travel expenses for.......1 6 8
taxation.................. 7 0Social security and railroadMedical and dental Tuition deduction for.......1 3 0
Workers’ compensation..... 4 9retirement benefits....... 7 9expenses ...............1 3 6 Dependents not allowed to
Standard Disability:Savings bonds............. 5 5 claim dependents......... 2 5
deduction...........131-132 Income ...................2 1 8Spouse’s death........19, 20 Depletion allowance......... 8 4Stop-smokingStandard deduction........1 3 1 Disability benefits:Deposits:programs ...............1 3 6Transfer of property at Earned Income Credit.....2 3 4Loss on...................1 9 2Student loan interest deductiondeath.................... 9 4 Disability insurance payments:Losses on ............98, 161(See Student loans)Declaration of rights of Earned Income Credit.....2 3 4Reporting of............1 6 5Theft loss.................1 9 2taxpayers: Disability, permanent and totalDepreciation:Transportation expenses (SeeIRS request for disability.................2 1 7Adjustment to basis for..... 9 0Travel and transportationinformation............... 2 Disaster Assistance Act ofAlternative minimum tax andexpenses)Deduction: 1988:acceleratedTuition and fees (See Tuition)Costs of discrimination Withholding................ 3 7depreciation............. 6 8Union dues (See Labor unions)suits..................... 8 6 Disaster mitigationCars......................1 7 5Work-related education....1 8 6Deductions (See also Bad debts; payments ................. 8 5Cellular telephone.........1 8 9Deeds:Capital losses; Entertainment Disaster relief (See also TerroristChange of use ofPreparation costs for......1 4 8expenses; Personal exemption; attacks)............48, 70, 163property................. 9 3Recording fees, basis toPoints; Recovery of amounts Cash gifts to victims.......1 6 2Computer .................1 8 9include.................. 9 0previously deducted; Standard Deductions for contributions toCorrecting amountDeferred annuity contracts (Seededuction)......20, 24, 32, 82, qualifiedclaimed.................. 6 8Annuities)99, 106, 131, 146, 148, 168, organizations...........1 5 1Form 4562:170 Deferred compensation: Disaster Relief and EmergencyRental propertyAlimony, deductible by Limit....................... 4 6 Assistance Act:depreciation........... 6 8payer..............124, 126 Nonqualified plans.......... 4 3 Grants................... 8 5Home computer ...........1 9 1Alternative motor vehicle Deferred compensation plans UnemploymentProperty used in trade orcredit.................... 9 1(See Retirement plans) assistance............. 8 4business, as noncapitalBusiness expenses (See Delinquent taxes: Employer’s emergency disasterassets................... 9 7Business expenses) Real estate transactions, tax fund....................1 6 2Real property:Casualty losses (See Capital allocation...............1 4 1 Government-ordered demolitionGain from disposition oflosses) Delivery services...........2 ,  9 or relocation of home that isproperty..........68, 103Changing claim after filing, needBusiness-related travel unsafe due to...........1 6 0Land, no depreciationto amend ................ 1 6 expense ................1 6 8 Grants or payments........ 8 5o f ..................... 6 8Charitable contributions (See Replacement of lost orDemutualization of life Rental property.........64, 68also Charitable destroyed property......1 6 3insurance companies ..... 9 6contributions).......151-159 Destroyed records.........1 7 6Disclosure statement........ 1 8Dental expenses (See MedicalClean-fuel vehicles......... 9 1 Diaper service..............1 3 6and dental expenses) Discount, bonds and notesDental expenses (See Medical Direct deposit of refunds.... 1 3 issued at.................. 5 7Dentures:and dental expenses) Directors’ fees.............. 8 6Deductibility as medical Discounted debt instruments:Depreciation............... 9 0 Disabilities, persons with: (Seeexpense ................1 3 6 (See also Original issueDisaster relief contributions to Physically or mentally not ablediscount (OID))............. 4 0Dependent:qualified to care for oneself.)........2 1 0 Capital gain or loss......... 9 7Dependent ................1 3 4organizations...........1 5 1 Accrued leave payment..... 4 8Discounts:Dependent care:Educator expenses..... 7 ,  1 2 7 Armed forces.............. 4 7 Employee discounts, effect onBenefits.............208, 212Estate....................1 9 1 Blind (See Blind persons) basis.................... 9 1Center....................2 1 1Fee-basis government Cafeteria plans............. 4 8Credit for.................2 0 8 Distributions (See alsoofficials.................1 8 1 Credit for (See Elderly or Rollovers; Dividends)...... 4 0 ,Dependent taxpayer test.... 2 5Impairment-related work disabled, credit for) 73Dependent’s educationexpenses ..........138, 181 Dependent who is disabled, Early (See Early withdrawalexpenses, claiming:Interest (See Interest payments) deduction for care from deferred interestEducation credit...........2 2 8Investment expenses......1 4 9 expenses ...............1 3 7 account)IRA contributions (See Dependents  (See also Adoption; Expenses for..............1 9 3 Liquidating distributions..... 6 2Individual retirement Child tax credit)...... 6 ,  7 ,  1 3 5Guide dogs, deductible as Lump sum (See Lump-sumarrangements (IRAs)) Birth of.................... 2 9 medical expense........1 3 6 distributions)Itemizing (See Itemized Born and died within Impairment-related work Nondividenddeductions) year.................11, 33 expenses of.......138, 181 distributions.............. 6 2Long-term care insurance Death of................... 2 9 Work-related Required minimum distributionscontracts...............1 3 6 Deceased dependent’s medical education.............1 8 8 (See Individual retirementMedical expenses (See Medical and dental expenses....1 3 6
Income .................... 4 8 arrangements (IRAs);and dental expenses) Disabled dependent care
Insurance costs............ 4 8 Pensions)Mortgage interest (See expenses, deduction
Return of capital............ 6 2Military and governmentMortgages) f o r......................1 3 7
pensions ................ 4 8District of Columbia first-timeNot itemizing, use of Form Exemption for...........24-32
Public assistance homebuyer credit........1 9 81040A .................... 7 Filing requirements.......... 6
benefits.................. 8 5Pass-through entities......1 9 1 Dividends: (See also FormEarned income, unearned
Reporting of disability pensionPenalties, no deduction 1099-DIV) ..............60-63income, and gross income
income .................. 4 8permitted...............1 4 9 levels (Table 1-2)....... 6 Alaska Permanent Fund (See
Retirement, pensions, andPerforming artists’ Alaska Permanent FundMarried, filing joint
profit-sharing plans....... 4 8expenses ...............1 8 1 dividends)return................... 2 5
Signing of return byPrepaid insurance As stock dividends and stockMedical and dental expenses
court-appointedpremiums ...............1 3 6 rights.................... 6 2o f ......................1 3 4
representative........... 1 3Prescription medicines.....1 3 6 Backup withholding......... 6 0Qualifying child........25, 135
Rental expenses.......64, 68 Social security and railroad Beneficiary of estate or trustQualifying relative.....28, 135
retirement benefits,Repayments ............... 8 3 receiving................ 6 0Social security number.... 1 1 ,
deductions for............ 7 9Section 179 deductions: Buying more stock with..... 6 132
Adjustment to basis Defined.................... 6 0Adoption taxpayer Special school or home for,
f o r .................... 9 0 identification deductibility of medical Exempt-interest
Car expenses...........1 7 5 number ............12, 33 expense ................1 3 6 dividends................ 6 3
Page 271

Page 274 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Drugs: Disability insurance Educator out-of-pocketDividends:(Cont.)
payments ...............2 3 4 expenses ............. 7 ,  1 2 7As medical expenses:Expenses related to, deduction
Filing claim................. 6o f ....................... 6 3Over-the-counter drugs, not Educators:
Foster child...............2 3 6deductible............1 3 6Fees to collect............1 9 1 Excess over limit..........1 9 0
Investment income, limitPrescription medicines,Foreign income............ 6 0 Expenses .................1 8 9
o n........................ 1deductibility...........1 3 6Form 1040A, use of......... 7 EE series bonds (See U.S.Married filing separately.... 2 0Dry cleaning: savings bonds)Form 1099-DIV (See Form Military personnel.........2 3 6Business-related travel1099-DIV) EIC (See Earned Income Credit)Social security card........2 3 6expense ...........168, 169Holding period, determination EITC Assistant.............2 3 2Social SecurityDual-status taxpayers........ 6o f ....................... 9 9 Elderly or disabled, creditNumber ................2 3 6Joint returns notInsurance dividends........ 6 3 for ......................... 7Earthquakes (See also Disasteravailable................. 2 0Money market funds........ 6 2 Married filing separately.... 2 0relief).....................1 6 3Standard deduction........1 3 1Nominees receiving on behalf of Elderly persons (See alsoCasualty loss causedDue dates ..................8 ,  9another.................. 6 0 Pensions).................. 7 0b y......................1 6 02004 dates (Table 1-5)...... 9Nondividend Credit for (See Elderly orEasements:Disaster areas, postponeddistributions.............. 6 2 disabled, credit for)Adjustment to basis for..... 9 1deadlines...............1 6 5Ordinary dividends......... 6 0 Exemption fromEducation:Extension (See Extension ofPatronage dividends........ 6 3 withholding.............. 3 6Savings bond program...... 5 6time to file)Qualified...............61, 63 Home for the aged......... 3 0Education credits: (See HopeNonresident aliens’ Long-term care (See Long-termReal estate investment trusts credit; Lifetime learningreturns................... 9 care insurance contracts)(REITs) paying........... 6 2 credit)................. 7 ,  2 2 9Due diligence: Nutrition Program for theRedemption treated as..... 9 4 Academic period..........2 2 6Child and dependent care Elderly................... 8 5Reinvestment plans........ 6 1 Can you claim (Figurecredit...................2 1 2 Standard deduction for age 65Reporting of................ 6 3 35-A)...................2 2 9Dues: or older.................1 3 1As interest............... 6 0 Comparison chart (TableChamber of Commerce ....1 8 9 Tax Counseling for theScrip dividends............. 6 3 35-1)...................2 2 5Club......................1 9 4 Elderly.................... 9Dependent’s educationSold stock................. 6 0Union.....................1 9 0 Election precinct officials:expenses, claiming......2 2 8Stockholder debts when Dwelling units (See also Home; Fees, reporting of.......... 8 6Eligible educationalcanceled as.............. 8 1 Vacation homes)....21, 66, 68 Elective deferrals (See alsoinstitution...............2 2 6Veterans’ insurance........ 6 3 Cooperative (See Cooperative Retirement plans).......... 7 0Expenses, qualifiedDivorced parents............ 2 6 housing) education...........226-228 Limits...................... 4 6Divorced parents, special Defined.................... 6 6Form 8863, completed Elective surgery:rule......................2 3 8Renting (See Rental income sample ...............230-0 Not deductible as medicalDivorced taxpayers (See also and expenses) General requirements.....2 2 5 expense ................1 3 6Alimony)................... 8 5 Income limits..............2 2 8Electric cars:Child and dependent care Married filing separately . . . 20,Credit....................1 7 4Ecredit...................2 1 0 225 Credits...................2 4 8E-file.................... 2 ,  4 ,  8Child custody.............. 2 6 Modified adjusted gross income Adjustment to basis...... 9 1Extensions of time to file..... 9Definition of divorce instrument (MAGI) .................2 2 8 Amount of..............2 4 8Forms 8453 and 8453-OL forfor purposes of Phaseout of credit.........2 2 8signature requirements.... 8alimony.................1 2 4 Filing requirements (TableQualified educationOn time filing................ 9 1-3).................... 8Estimated tax payments.... 4 1 expenses ...........226-228 How to take.............2 4 8Early withdrawal from deferredFiling status............19, 20 Recapture of................ 7interest account: Qualified electricIRAs.................114, 118 Filing requirements (Table
Annuities.................. 7 4 vehicle...............2 4 8Medical and dental expenses of 1-3).................... 8
Form 1099-R reporting (See Recapture of............2 4 8children of..............1 3 5 Timing of...............2 2 8
Form 1099-R) Electronic filing (See E-file)Mortgage interest, payment as Refund of expenses.......2 2 6
Form 5329 reporting (See Formalimony.................1 4 4 Tuition deduction and......2 2 6Electronic payment
5329) Who cannot claim.....225-226Personal exemption........ 2 4 options .................2 ,  1 4
Higher education expenses, Education expenses (See also Credit card.............14, 39Real estate taxes, allocation exception from Tuition)................ 7 ,  1 2 9o f ......................1 4 2 Electronic Federal Tax Paymentpenalty.................1 1 2Employer-provided (See System (EFTPS).....14, 39Transfers between IRAs: Educational assistance)spouses .............92, 96 Electronic fundsEarly distributions, Teacher’s out-of-pocket withdrawal....14, 34, 39, 40Use of home after defined...............1 2 0 expenses ............ 7 ,  1 2 7divorce.................1 0 3 Electronic reporting:Penalties..........118, 120 Tuition (See Qualified tuitionDoctors’ bills (See Medical and Returns (See E-file)Section 457 deferred programs)dental expenses) Tip statement from employeescompensation plans...... 7 4 Work-related education, to employers............. 5 0Documentary evidence: Tax on..................... 7 4 deduction ofRecordkeeping Eligible educational institution:Earned income .............2 3 9 expenses ...............1 8 7requirements............1 7 5 Education credits..........2 2 6Child and dependent care Educational assistance (SeeDomestic help: Foreign schools......128, 129credit...................2 1 0also Tuition)............ 7 ,  1 2 9Withholding................ 3 4 Student loan interestDefined: Employer-provided......... 4 4 deduction...............1 2 8Domestic help, no exemption For purposes of standard Tuition deduction, effect Tuition and feesfor ........................ 2 5 deduction.............1 3 2 o n....................1 3 0 deduction...............1 2 9Domestic relations orders, Dependent filing requirements Scholarships (See Scholarships Eligible foster child......26, 28qualified (QDROs): (Table 1-2)................ 6 and fellowships)
Rollover of retirement plan Eligible student:Employee .................2 3 4Tuition (See Qualified tuition
distribution............... 7 4 Hope credit...............2 2 9Self-employed............2 3 4 programs)
Donations (See Charitable Lifetime learning credit.....2 2 9Earned Income Credit.....200, Educational institution (See
contributions) Student loan interest232 Eligible educational institution)
deduction...............1 2 7Droughts: 2005 changes............... 1Educational organizations:
Tuition and feesLosses of property due Advance ..................2 ,  7As related party in
deduction...............1 3 0t o ......................1 6 0Filing requirements (Table transactions............. 9 6
Embezzlement:Drug or alcohol rehabilitation 1-3).................... 8 Charitable contributions
centers: Losses due to.............1 6 0Amount of earned income.... 1 t o .................151, 152
Considered unmarried...... 2 1Deductibility of medical 50% limit on Reporting embezzled
expense ................1 3 6Disability benefits..........2 3 4 deduction.............1 5 7 funds.................... 8 7
Page 272

Page 275 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emergency medical service Energy conservation: Avoiding................... 3 7Exclusions from gross income:
personnel: Measures and Change in estimated tax .... 3 9 Accelerated death
modifications............. 8 6 benefits.................. 8 1Credit for...........34, 40, 41Life insurance proceeds when
Subsidies.................. 8 6death in line of duty...... 8 2 Definition.................. 3 4Annuities.................. 7 1
Exclusion as adjustment to Divorced taxpayers......... 4 1 Canceled debt............. 8 1Emotional distress
basis.................. 9 1Electronic fundsdamages .................. 8 6 Capital gains from home sale
Utility rebates.............. 8 8 withdrawal........34, 39, 40 (See Sale of home)Employee benefits (See specific
Figuring amount of tax...... 3 9Entertainers and Commuting benefits fortype of benefit (e.g., Health
musicians ................1 9 0First period, no income subject employees............... 4 5insurance, Life insurance, etc.;
to estimated tax in........ 3 9Fringe benefits)) Entertainment De minimis benefits........ 4 4
Fiscal year taxpayers....... 3 9expenses ...........168, 170Employee business Disability pensions of federal
Married taxpayers.......... 3 850% limit..................1 7 1expenses ............166-182 employees and
Name change .............. 4 1 military.................. 4 8Figure 26-A summary ofCommuting expenses .....1 7 3
Not required............... 3 8rules.................1 7 2 Education Savings BondDeductions for............1 6 6
Overpayment applied to.... 1 3Allocation of costs....171, 176 Program ................. 8 7Form 2106 for
Payment vouchers.....39, 40Business-related gifts Educational assistance fromdeducting.............1 7 7
v s . ................171, 172 Payments ..............14, 39 employer ................ 4 4Impairment-related work
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Figuring amount of each Elective deferrals, limit onexpenses, deduction
fill out..................1 8 0 payment ............... 3 9 exclusion................ 4 6f o r.................138, 181
Meal expenses Schedule ................ 3 9 Employee awards.......... 4 2Meals (See Meal and lodging included................1 7 1 When to start............ 3 9 Energy conservationexpenses) Proof of expenses.........1 7 5 Who must make .......... 3 8 subsidies............86, 88Reimbursements (See also Per Table 26-2 summary....1 7 7 Penalty for Foreign earned income...... 2diem)......36, 42, 177, 178, Recordkeeping underpayment .......34, 39, Frozen deposit interest..... 8 7179 requirements............1 7 5 41, 202 Group-term lifeReimbursements: Reporting of...............1 7 7 IRS computation of, Form insurance................ 4 5Returning excess . . . 36, 179 Table 26-3 showing forms to 2210 .................. 4 1Holocaust victimsTravel (See Travel and be used ..............1 8 0 Pension payments.......... 7 0 restitution................ 8 7transportation expenses) Taking turns paying for meals orSafe harbor for higher income Long-term care insuranceWork-related entertainment...........1 7 1 individuals............... 3 4 contracts............48, 49education..........184, 188 Tickets: Saturday, Sunday, holiday Parking fees,Employee expenses: Face-value as deductible rule..................... 3 9 employer-provided....... 4 5Cellular telephone.........1 8 9 amount ...............1 7 1 Separate returns........... 4 1 Public safety officers who diedHome computer ......189, 191 Gift vs. entertainment Social security or railroad or were killed in line of duty,Miscellaneous.............1 8 9 deduction........171, 172 retirement benefits....... 7 7 death benefits............ 8 2
Employees: (See also Fringe State and local income taxes,Equipment  (See also Sale of home............... 8 8benefits)...............43, 44 deduction of............1 4 0Tools)....................1 7 4 Scholarships............... 8 8UnemploymentRental for rentalAwards for service.......... 4 2 Strike benefits.............. 8 8compensation............ 8 4property................. 6 5Business expenses (See Terrorist attack as cause ofEstimates:Equitable relief (See InnocentEmployee business injury, disabilityTravel expenses..........1 7 5spouse relief)expenses) payments ................ 7 0
Exceptions to 2% limit......1 8 9Discounts for, effect on Errors: Executors andbasis.................... 9 1Address label, correction Excess benefits tax (See Section administrators............. 5
o f ....................... 1 5Form W-4 to be filled out when 72(m)(5)) Related partyDepreciation, correcting amountstarting new job.......... 3 5 Excess reimbursements: transactions............. 9 6on Form 1040X .......... 6 8Fringe benefits (See Fringe Business expense Exempt-interestDiscovery after filing, need tobenefits) reimbursements.....36, 179 dividends ................. 5 3amend return............ 1 6Jury duty pay.............. 8 7 Medical expenses.........1 3 7 Alternative minimum tax.... 6 3Form 1099 showing incorrect Excess reimbursementOverseas employment (See Dividend reporting.......... 6 3amount .................. 6 0 flowchart (FigureForeign employment) Information-reportingForm W-2c for corrected wage 21-A).................1 3 8Employers (See also Payroll requirement.............. 6 3and tax statement........ 4 0Excess withholdingdeductions)...............1 5 8 Exemption amount:IRAs, failure to take required credit...............246, 248E-file options................ 9 2005 changes............... 1distribution..............1 2 0 How to take...............2 4 9Educational assistance from Exemption from foreign taxRefunds ................... 1 6Joint returns..............2 4 8(See Educational assistance) credit limit...............2 4 7Escrow: Exchange students:Form W-4, having new Exemptions:Taxes placed in, when Expenses paid for, deductibleemployees fill out........ 3 5 Dependents.............24-32deductible..............1 4 2 when under agreement withOverseas employment (See From withholding........... 3 6Estate beneficiaries (See also qualifiedForeign employment) Personal (See PersonalInheritance)............92, 99 organization............1 5 3Vehicles provided by....... 4 4 exemption)Dividends received by...... 6 0Exchanges  (See also Trade ofWithholding rules........... 3 5 Phaseout ...........20, 24, 32IRAs (See Individual retirementproperty)...............94, 95Employment: Securities, tax-exempt (Seearrangements (IRAs)) Like-kind exchanges....91, 95Agency fees..........86, 190 Securities)Losses of estate............ 8 6 Partially nontaxableR´esum´e expenses ........1 9 0 State or local governmentReceiving income from exchange ............92, 95 bonds, tax-exempt....... 9 7Taxes: (See also Social security estate................... 8 6Tax-free:and Medicare taxes)...... 4 3 Expatriates.................1 0 4Rollover restrictions........ 7 4 Definition of.............. 9 1Taxes: Expenses paid byEstate tax: Holding period, determinationanother ................... 8 6FICA withholding (See Deduction.................1 4 3 o f ..................... 9 8Withholding) Extension of time to file...... 9Estates: (See also Estate Taxable exchange,Tip income.............8 ,  5 0 Automatic................9 ,  1 0beneficiaries).............. 8 6 defined.................. 9 1
Employment taxes (See also Citizens outside U.S........ 1 0Income .................... 8 6Excise taxes: (See alsoSocial security and Medicare E-file options................ 9Investment interest........1 4 8 Penalties).................1 1 8taxes)..........208, 211, 213 Inclusion on return.......... 1 0Tax (See Estate tax) Basis to include............ 8 9
FICA withholding (See Extortion:Tax: Deductibility (Table
Withholding) Losses due to.............1 6 0Survivor’s annuity........ 7 5 22-1)...................1 4 2
Empowerment zone ........1 9 8 Eye surgery:Estimated tax............34-41 IRAs for failure to take minimum
Endowment proceeds ....... 8 1 distributions.............1 1 8Amount to pay to avoid Deductibility as medical
Energy assistance.......... 8 5 penalty.................. 3 9Roth IRAs ...........122, 123 expense ................1 3 6
Page 273

Page 276 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Eyeglasses: FICA withholding  (See Social First-time homebuyer credit: State benefit funds,
security and Medicare taxes; mandatory contributionsAs medical expense.......1 3 6 District of Columbia........1 9 8
Withholding) to ....................1 4 1First-year expensing (See
Taxes, deduction of.....1 4 3Fiduciaries (See also Executors Section 179 deductions)
F and administrators; Schedule C:Fiscal year...........11, 39, 41
Trustees)..........5 ,  113, 114Failure to comply with tax laws Real estate or personalFishermen:
(See Penalties) Fees for services ........... 8 6 property taxes on propertyEstimated tax.............. 3 8Prohibited transactions....1 1 9 used in business, deductionFair market value (FMV): Indian fishing rights......... 8 7 o f ....................1 4 3Related partyCasualty loss.............1 6 1 Fleet operations:transactions............. 9 6 Schedule E:Definition of................ 8 9 Standard mileage rate notFigures (See Tables and figures)Sales of property........... 9 5 Real estate or personalallowed.................1 7 4 property taxes on rentalStolen property............1 6 1Figuring taxes and credits (See Flexible spending account or property, deductionalso Worksheets)......76, 129,Fair rental price............. 6 6 arrangement .............1 3 6 o f ....................1 4 3130, 198, 248Fair rental value............. 3 0 Floods (See also Disaster Schedule F:Filing requirements: (See alsoFamily (See also Child tax credit; relief).....................1 6 3 Real estate or personalMarried filingChildren; Dependents; Related Casualty loss caused property taxes on propertyseparately)............4-18, 20party transactions)....... 6 ,  9 6 , b y......................1 6 0 used in business, deductionCalendar year filers.......... 9206, 221 FMV  (See Fair market value) o f ....................1 4 3Citizens outside U.S......... 5Adoption credit (See Adoption) Food benefits: Self-employment tax, deductionDependents................. 6Care credit (See Child and Nutrition program for the o f ......................1 4 3Electronic (See E-file)dependent care credit) elderly................... 8 5Form 1040-ES:Extensions.................. 9Standard meal allowance not Food stamps ................ 2 9 Estimated tax..........39, 40allowed if related to Gross income levels (Table Foreclosure...........101, 148employer ...............1 7 8 1-1)...................... 5 Form 1040-ES(NR):
Foreign children:Individual taxpayers......... 5Farming: Estimated tax for nonresident
Adoption credit............2 4 7Joint filing (See also Joint aliens................... 3 8Activity not for profit........ 8 5
Foreign employment ......6 ,  4 7returns)..............19, 20Canceled debt, treatment Form 1040A:
Employment abroad........ 4 7Late filing penalties (Seeo f ....................... 8 1 Estimated tax payments.... 4 1
Penalties) Pension planPatronage dividends........ 6 3 Overpayment offset against
contributions............. 7 1Most taxpayers (TableFarmworkers: next year’s tax........... 3 9
1-1)...................... 5 Social security and MedicareEstimated tax.............. 3 8 Form 1099-B:
Other situations requiring filingtaxes.................... 4 7Withholding................ 3 4 Barter income.............. 4 0(Table 1-3)................ 8 U.S. citizen................ 4 7Federal crime investigations or Form 1099-DIV:Unmarried persons (See Single Waiver of alien status....... 4 7prosecutions: Dividend incometaxpayers)Travel expenses..........1 6 7 Foreign governments, statement................ 4 0When to file................. 9 employees of ............. 4 7Federal employees: Form 1099-G:Where to file.............4 ,  1 5Foreign income:Accrued leave payment..... 4 3 Government payments ..... 4 0Who must file.......... 4 ,  5 ,  6Cost-of-living Dividends.................. 6 0Form 1099–G:Filing status............5 ,  19-23allowances.............. 4 3 Earned income exclusion.... 2 State tax refunds........... 8 2Annulled marriages......... 1 9Disability pensions......... 4 8 Reporting of................. 2Form 1099-INT:Change to, after time ofBased on years of Sale of foreign property..... 9 4 Interest incomefiling..................... 1 6service................ 4 8 Foreign income taxes: statement................ 4 0Divorced taxpayers......... 1 9Exclusion, conditions Deduction of..............1 4 1Form 1099-MISC:Head of household.....19, 21f o r .................... 4 8 Form 1116 to claim Miscellaneous income...... 4 0Qualifying person to fileTerrorist attack........... 4 8 credit.................1 4 3Withheld state and locala s..................... 2 2FECA payments ............ 4 9 Schedule A or Form 1040 taxes...................1 4 0Joint returns............... 1 9Federal Employees’ reporting.............1 4 3Form 1099-OID:Married filing separately.... 2 0Compensation Act (FECA) Definition of...............1 4 0 Original issue discount, fromSurviving spouse........... 1 9payments ................. 4 9 Foreign nationals (See Resident issuer or broker.......... 4 0Unmarried persons (See alsoFederal government: aliens) Form 1099-R:Single taxpayers)......5 ,  1 9Charitable contributions Foreign organizations: Retirement planFinal return for decedent:t o .................151, 152 Charitable contributions distributions.............. 4 0Capital loss deductionEmployees (See Federal t o .................152, 155 Withheld state and local taxeso n......................1 0 6employees) Foreign schools.......128, 129 shown on ...............1 4 0Medical expenses.........1 3 6Federal income tax: Foreign Service............1 0 2Form 1099-S:Standard deduction........1 3 1Interest on, not
Foreign students............ 2 5 Real estate transactionsFinance charges:deductible..............1 4 9
proceeds ...............1 4 2Expenses paid for, deductibleNot deductible............1 4 3 Credit cards, retail installment
when under agreement with Form 1116:contracts, etc., notDeductibility (Table
qualified Foreign tax credit..........1 4 3deductible..............1 4 922-1).................1 4 2
organization............1 5 3Form 2210:Financial institutions (See alsoFederal judges:
Foreign tax credit..........2 4 7Banks)................98, 113 Underpayment of estimatedEmployer retirement plan
How to take...............2 4 7 t a x ...................... 4 1coverage ...............1 1 4Financially disabled
Limit on...................2 4 7persons ................... 1 7 Form:Fee-basis officials.....189, 193
Forgiveness of debt (See 1040 .................58, 200Business expenses of.....1 8 1Fines (See Penalties)
Cancellation of debt)Work-related education Deductibility...............1 9 4 Address label............ 1 5
Form 1040:expenses ...............1 8 8 Adoption expenses......2 4 7Firefighters:
Estimated tax payments.... 4 1Fees (See specific types of Alaska Permanent FundLife insurance proceeds when
Foreign income taxes,deductions and income) dividends.............. 6 3death in line of duty...... 8 2
deduction of............1 4 3Professional license.......1 9 4 Volunteer firefighters: Alien taxpayer identification
Gambling winnings......... 3 7 numbers............... 3 3Fees, comprehensive/ Charitable contributions
bundled .............130, 228 t o ....................1 5 2Overpayment offset against Alternative minimum tax,
next year’s tax........... 3 9 Credit for prior yearIRAs ...................1 1 5Fellowships (See Scholarships
t a x ...................2 4 8Schedule A:and fellowships) Fires:
Armed forces’ retirementGeneral sales taxes,Fertility enhancement Arson, no casualty loss
p a y ................... 4 7deduction of..........1 4 3procedures: f o r......................1 6 0
Attachments to........... 1 2Deductibility as medical Casualty loss caused State and local income taxes,
expense ................1 3 6 b y.................160, 163 deduction of ..........1 4 3 Capital gains............. 6 3
Page 274

Page 277 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Outplacement services, Armed forces’ retirement 1098:Form:
deduction.............. 4 3 p a y ................... 4 7 More than one borrower (not1040 (Cont.)
Attachments to return..... 1 2Travel expenses, deduction spouse), reporting ofCharitable contributions,
o f ....................1 7 9Capital gains............. 6 3 mortgage interestdeduction to be
Clergy pension........... 4 6 deduction by attachingUnearned commission,itemized..............1 5 1
Disability retirement of ....................1 5 0deduction for repaymentCheck mailed with........ 1 4
p a y ................... 4 8o f ..................... 4 2 Mortgage interest overpaid inChild’s capital gain
Dividend income earlier year...........1 4 61040, Schedule B:distributions..........1 4 9
reporting.............. 6 3 Mortgage interestDividends................ 6 3Clergy pension........... 4 6
Dividends................ 6 3 statement.....69, 82, 1481040, Schedule C:Deduction for alimony Educator expenses......1 2 7 Points reported on.......1 4 8Barter income............ 8 0paid..................1 2 6 Excess withholding Prepaid interest reportedChild care providers...... 4 2Disability retirement credit.................2 4 9 o n....................1 4 8Corporate directorp a y ................... 4 8 FECA benefits........... 4 9 Refund of interest reportedfees................... 8 6Dividends................ 6 3 Insurance o n....................1 4 8Forgiveness of debts..... 8 0Educator expenses......1 2 7 distributions........... 6 3 1098-C ..................... 1Foster-care providers..... 8 7Electric vehicle credit....2 4 8 IRA distributions........1 1 9 Contributions of MotorKickbacks............... 8 7Excess withholding Personal exemption...... 2 4 Vehicles, Boats andNotary fees.............. 8 6credit.................2 4 9 Presidential Election Airplanes.............1 5 1Oil, gas, or mineral interestFECA benefits........... 4 9 Campaign Fund........ 1 2 Contributions of Motorroyalties............... 8 4Foreign tax credit.......2 4 7 Railroad retirement benefits, Vehicles, Boats, andRental income andHealth insurance reporting on........... 7 7 Airplanes.............1 5 5expenses..........69, 83credit.................2 4 9 Rehabilitative program 1098-E ...................1 2 9Statutory employees....1 7 7Insurance payments.............. 4 7 1098-T .........228, 229, 230Work-related educationdistributions........... 6 3 Reporting pay............ 4 2 1099:expenses.............1 8 8IRAs ..............119, 120 Social security benefits, Taxable income1040, Schedule C-EZ:Mortgage interest reporting on........... 7 7 report.............11, 42Child care providers...... 4 2credit.................2 4 7 Social Security 1099-A:Corporate directorPersonal exemption...... 2 4 Numbers .............. 3 2 Acquisition or abandonmentfees................... 8 6Presidential Election Student loan interest of securedFoster-care providers..... 8 7Campaign Fund........ 1 2 deduction.............1 2 9 property..............1 0 1Kickbacks............... 8 7Railroad retirement benefits, Tip income reporting..... 5 1 1099-B ...................1 0 5Notary fees.............. 8 6reporting on........... 7 7 Use of............. 7 ,  19, 20 Barter income............ 8 0Oil, gas, or mineral interestRecapture of Workers’ Broker to report sales ofroyalties............... 8 4alimony...............1 2 6 compensation.......... 4 9 stocks, bonds, orRental income and 1040A, Schedule 1:Reporting of alimony commodities......94, 105expenses..........69, 83 Dividends................ 6 3received..............1 2 6 1099-C:Statutory employees....1 7 7 1040EZ ...................2 0 0Reporting taxes on tips not Cancellation of debt..... 8 0 ,Work-related education Address label............ 1 5reported to 101expenses.............1 8 8 Alaska Permanent Fundemployer.............. 5 1 1099-DIV:1040, Schedule D: dividends.............. 6 3Reporting uncollected taxes Dividend incomeBusiness property FECA benefits........... 4 9on tips................. 5 1 statement......46, 60, 63sales.................. 9 5 No attachments.......... 1 2Schedule A:, Mortgage Return of capital......... 6 2Capital gains or Personal exemption...... 2 4interest deduction.....2 4 7 1099-INT ..............52, 59losses...........105, 106 Presidential ElectionSocial security benefits, 1099-MISC:Child’s capital gain Campaign Fund........ 1 2reporting on........... 7 7 Brokers receivingdistributions..........1 4 9 Reporting pay............ 4 2Social Security dividends.............. 6 0Fractional shares, sale Tip income reporting..... 5 1Numbers .............. 3 2 Nonemployeeo f ..................... 6 2Use of.................6 ,  1 9Student loan interest compensation.......... 8 6Home sale, capital gains Workers’deduction.............1 2 9 1099-OID .................. 5 8from..................1 0 3 compensation.......... 4 9Tip income reporting..... 5 1 1099-R .................... 5 6Nonbusiness bad debts, loss 1040NR:Undistributed long-term Early distributions of pensionof deposits due to bank’s Nonresident aliencapital gains..........2 4 9 funds.................. 7 4insolvency or return.................. 9Use of............. 7 ,  19, 20 IRA distributions.......119,bankruptcy...........1 6 1 1040NR-EZ:Wages and salary 121Sale expenses..........1 0 5 Nonresident alien easyreporting.............. 4 2 Life insurance policyUndistributed long-term return.................. 9Workers’ surrendered forcapital gains..........1 0 6 1040X:compensation.......... 4 9 cash .................. 8 1Worthless securities...... 9 4 Amended individual1040, Schedule A: Retirement plan1040, Schedule E: return................. 1 6Charitable distributions........... 1 2Income-producing property, Annulled marriages....... 1 9contributions......15, 151, 1099-S ...................1 0 5deduction of interest on Bad debts, claim for159 Real estate transactionsloan for...............1 5 0 refund................. 9 9Employee business expense proceeds........100, 105Rental income and Change of filing status.... 2 1deduction.............1 8 1 1116:expenses.............. 6 9 Check mailed with........ 1 4Federal employees buying Foreign tax credit.......2 4 7Royalties................ 8 3 Child’s return...........2 0 5back sick leave........ 4 9 1120S:1040, Schedule F: Completing.............. 1 6
Gifts, deduction of.......1 7 7 S corporation income..... 8 2Self-employed Depreciation: Correcting
Home mortgage interest 2106:persons ..............1 7 7 amount of............. 6 8
deduction.............1 4 4 Work-related education Business-relatedFiling.................... 1 6
Investment expenses expenses.............1 8 8 expenses........177, 180Itemized deduction, change to
deduction.............1 4 9 1040, Schedule SE.......6 ,  4 6 Performing artists.......1 8 1standard
Investment interest 1040-V: Travel expenses........1 7 9deduction.............1 3 2
deduction.............1 5 0 Payment voucher........ 1 4 Work-related educationStandard deduction, change
Itemized deduction 1040A ................58, 200 expenses .............1 8 8to itemized
limit..................1 3 2 Address label............ 1 5 2106-EZ:deductions............1 3 2
Loss of deposits due to Adoption expenses......2 4 7 Business-relatedWorthless securities, claim for
bank’s insolvency or expenses.............1 8 0Alaska Permanent Fund refund................. 9 4
bankruptcy cause.....1 6 1 dividends.............. 6 3 Performing artists.......1 8 11065:
Medical and dental Alien taxpayer identification Partnership income ....... 8 2 Work-related education
expenses.............1 3 8 numbers ............... 3 3 1096 .....................1 0 5 expenses.............1 8 8
Page 275

Page 278 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8275: 8839: W-4V:Form: (Cont.)
Disclosure statement..... 1 8 Qualified adoption Voluntary withholding2119:
expenses.........44, 2478275-R: request................ 8 4Postponement of gain from
Regulation disclosure 8853:sale of home..........1 0 2 W - 5 ......................2 4 1
statement............. 1 8 Accelerated death2439: W-7:
8283: benefits ............... 8 2Notice to shareholder on Individual taxpayer
Charitable noncash Archer MSAs and long-termundistributed long-term identification number
contribution of more than care insurancecapital gains......62, 249 request................ 3 3
$500 value...........1 5 9 contracts.............. 4 42441 .....................2 1 3 W-7A:
8332: 8857:2555 .....................2 3 4 Adoption taxpayerRelease of exemption to Innocent spouse relief .... 2 02555-EZ ..................2 3 4 identification numbernoncustodial parent.... 2 6 8862 .....................2 3 2 request............12, 332848: 8379: 8863 ................229, 230 W-9:Power of attorney and Injured spouse claim..... 1 3 Completed sample....230-0declaration of TIN of home seller and8396: 8874:representative.....13, 20 purchaser............1 5 0Mortgage interest New markets credit, filing3115 ...................... 5 5 Form RRB-1099:credit............144, 247 requirements (Table3800: Railroad retirement843: 1-3) .................... 8General business benefits.................. 4 0Claim for refund and request 8879:credit.................. 1 7 Form SSA-1099:for abatement.........2 4 8 Authorization for E-file4029 .....................2 3 4 Social security benefits..... 4 08453: provider to use4070: Form W-2:Address label............ 1 5 self-selected PIN........ 8Reporting tips to Employer-reported incomeE-file, for signature 8880:employer.............. 5 0 statement................ 4 0requirement............ 8 Credit for Qualified4070A: Filing with return........... 4 08453-OL: Retirement Savings
Daily record of tips....... 5 0 Separate form from eachAddress label............ 1 5 Contributions.........2 4 7
4137: employer ................ 4 0E-file, for signature 8885:
Social security and Medicare requirement............ 8 Health insurance Withheld state and local
taxes on tips not reported 8582: credit .................2 4 9 taxes...................1 4 0
to employer............ 5 1 Passive activity gains or 8901: Form W-2c:
4361 .....................2 3 4 losses............69, 105 Information on Qualifying Corrected wage and tax
4506: 8606: Children Who Are Not statement................ 4 0
Copy of tax return IRA contributions, Dependents ..........2 2 1Form W–2G:
request................ 1 6 Nondeductible.......112, 9465: Gambling winnings withholding116, 119 Installment agreement4506-T: statement............37, 40IRA contributions, request ................ 1 5Tax return transcript Form W-2G:Recharacterization Requiring Form 1040 to be usedrequest................ 1 6 Withheld state and local taxeso f ....................1 1 8when filing................ 84562: shown on ...............1 4 08615 ...................... 5 2RRB-1042S:Depreciation of rental Form W–4:Children under age 14 with Railroad retirement benefitsproperty............... 6 8 Employee withholdingmore than $1,600 of for nonresident4684: allowance certificate..... 3 4 ,investment income.... 6 0 , aliens................. 7 6Bank deposit, loss due to 35, 37205 RRB-1099:bank’s insolvency or Filling out form andForm 1040A may be used Railroad retirementbankruptcy...........1 6 1 worksheets.............. 3 5when filing.............. 7 benefits............... 7 6Casualty or theft Form W–4P:Net investment SS-5 .....................2 3 3loss.............160, 165 Pensions and annuitiesincome ...............2 0 5 Social security number4797: withholding certificate..... 3 7Parental information.....2 0 5 request............11, 33Sales of business Form W–4S:Sample completed SSA-1042S:property..........95, 103 Sick pay withholdingform..................2 0 6 Social security benefits forSmall business stock request.................. 3 68801: nonresident aliens ..... 7 6losses................. 9 8 Alternative minimum SSA-1099: Form W–4V:4868 ....................9 ,  3 3 t a x ...................2 4 8Social security Unemployment compensation,Automatic extension of time 8812: benefits ............... 7 6 voluntary withholdingto file................9 ,  3 3Additional child tax W-10 .....................2 1 1 request.................. 3 7Filing electronic form..... 1 0 credit.................2 2 2W-2: Form(s) 1099:Filing paper form......... 1 0 8814 ...................... 5 2 Box 12 with code L.....166, Taxable income report..... 3 7 ,4952: Additional tax, figuring 179, 180 40Investment interest expense o f ....................2 0 2Election precinct officials’Forms  (See also Taxdeduction.............1 4 9 Calculation of child’s fees ................... 8 6returns)..................... 4Net capital gain, election to income ...............2 0 2 Employer retirement plan Foster care:include as investment Capital gains participation Adoption as motive for, noincome ...............1 4 9 distributions..........2 0 2 indicated.............1 1 4 charitable deduction.....1 5 44972: Parents’ election to report Employer-reported income Care providers’Lump-sum child’s interest and statement .....10, 12, 42, payments ................ 8 6distributions........... 7 3 dividends....60, 149, 201 43, 46 Charitable deduction for5329: Reduced deductions or Fringe benefits .......43, 44 nonprofit care...........1 5 4Early distributions of credits................2 0 2 Recordkeeping........... 1 6 Child tax credit............2 2 1sheltered funds........ 7 4 Sample form............2 0 3 Reimbursements reported as Difficulty-of-careRequired minimum 8815 ...................... 5 6 part of income.......166, payments ................ 8 7distributions, failure to 8818 ...................... 5 7 177, 178, 179, 180 Emergency foster care,take.........75, 120, 121 8822: Statutory employees ....1 7 7 maintaining space in home6251 .....................1 9 9 Change of address....... 1 6 Uncollected taxes........ 5 1 f o r....................... 8 7Alternative minimum 8824: W-2G:
Expenses unreimbursed andt a x ...................2 0 6Like-kind exchanges..... 9 5 Gambling winnings
not deductible as charitable6252: 8828: withholding
contributions............1 5 4Installment sale Recapture of federal statement ............. 8 7
Foster care payments andincome ...............1 0 4 mortgage subsidy.....1 0 4 W-4P:
expenses ................. 2 98271: 8834: Rollover distributions, election
Foster child..........26, 28, 29Investor report of tax shelter Electric vehicle credit....2 4 8 not to have tax
registration number.... 1 8 8836 .................. 2 ,  2 3 2withheld............... 7 0 Earned Income Credit.....2 3 6
Page 276

Page 279 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Foster Grandparent Gambling (See Gambling Glasses: Health:
Program .................. 4 7 winnings and losses) As medical expense.......1 3 6 Flexible spending
arrangement............. 4 4Hobby losses.............. 8 7Found property ............. 8 7 Gold and silver:
ReimbursementOrdinary gain and loss...... 9 7 As capital assets........... 9 7Fractional shares:
arrangement............. 4 4Capital gains or losses fromBank deposit, loss due toPayment for................ 6 2
Savings account........... 4 4sale or trade of..........1 0 6bank’s insolvency orFraternal societies:
Health coverage taxIRA investments in........1 1 9bankruptcy...........1 6 1Charitable contributions
credit................. 6 ,  2 4 9Ordinary loss............... 9 7Golden parachute payments:t o ......................1 5 1
Health insurance: (See alsoTax on....................1 9 9Passive activity (See alsoDues, no charitable
Accident insurance)........ 4 3Passive activity)......21, 69, Golf clubs (See Country clubs)deduction..........152, 155
Auto insurance policy covering,105 Goodwill Industries (SeeFraud:
not deductible as medicalRelated party sale or trade of Charitable contributions)Losses due to.............1 6 0
expense ................1 3 6depreciable property..... 9 6Penalties..............18, 36 Government employees: Premiums:Short-term............97, 105Reporting anonymously to Federal (See Federal Credit for workers displacedPriority in deducting.....1 0 6I R S ...................... 2 employees) by foreign trade orSale or trade of property heldState (See State or localFree tax services...........2 6 5 receiving pension from1 year or less.......... 9 8 governments)Freight: PBGC ................1 3 4Theft (See Theft losses) Graduate school (See alsoBasis to include............ 8 9 Deductible as medicalTotal net gain.............1 0 6 EducationalFringe benefits: expense ..............1 3 6Gambling winnings and assistance)...............1 2 8Accident and health Self-employed persons,losses................87, 192 Tuition deduction (See Tuition)insurance................ 4 3 deductibleForm 1040 ................. 3 7Grants (See Scholarships andAccounting period.......... 4 3 expenses.............1 3 9Withholding............37, 40 fellowships)Adoption, employer Reimbursement ...........1 3 7Gaming Industry Tipassistance............... 4 4 Grants, disaster relief....... 8 5Health insuranceCompliance AgreementArcher MSA Gratuities (See Tip income) premiums ................. 3 0Program .................. 5 1contributions............. 4 4 Gross income: Health savings account....1 3 6De minimis benefits........ 4 4Garbage pickup: Adjustments other than on FormHealth Spa.................1 9 4Education assistance....... 4 4 Deductibility (Table 1040A, Form 1040 to be Hearing aids:Employer-provided 22-1)...................1 4 2 used ..................... 7 As medical expense.......1 3 6vehicles................. 4 4Garnishment and Age, higher filing threshold afterHedging transactions....... 9 7Form W-2 .................. 4 3attachment................ 1 1 6 5........................ 5
Group-term life insurance Help (See Tax help)Defined..................... 5Gas royalties................ 8 4premiums ................ 4 4 High income taxpayers:Filing requirements (TableGems:Holiday gifts................ 4 4 Estimated tax.............. 3 81-1).................... 5As capital assets........... 9 7Retirement planning High-low rate method toDependent filing requirementsIRA prohibited transactionsservices................. 4 5 compute per diem........1 7 8(Table 1-2)................ 6i n ......................1 1 9Taxable income............ 4 3 Rental income............. 6 4Higher education (See CollegesGeneral business credit....1 9 8Transportation............. 4 5 and universities)Gross income test........... 2 9General Rule (See Annuities)Withholding................ 3 6 Hobbies ....................1 9 1Group-term life insurance:General sales taxes:Frozen deposits: Activity not for profit........ 8 5Accidental deathDeduction of:Interest on................. 8 7 Losses .................... 8 7benefits.................. 4 4Schedule A (FormIRA rollover period Definition.................. 4 4Holding period:1040) ................1 4 3extension...............1 1 7 Exclusion from income...... 4 5 Determination of........... 9 8GI Bill benefits.............. 3 1Fuels: Limitation on............. 4 4Holiday gifts................ 4 4Gift taxes:Clean-fuel vehicles......... 9 1 Permanent benefits......... 4 4Holiday, deadline fallingNot deductible............1 4 3Full-time student: Taxable cost, calculation on ......................... 3 9Gifts:Child and dependent care o f ....................... 4 5Holocaust victims$25 limit on business-relatedcredit...................2 1 0 Uncollected social restitution................. 8 7expenses ...............1 7 2 security/Medicare taxes.... 8Fund-raising events: Home  (See also Vacation homes;$4 or less for business-related Reporting of (TableCharitable contributions, Casualty losses; Mortgages;expenses ...............1 7 2 1-3).................... 8amount deductible.......1 5 2 Refinancing)......66, 68, 144,Adjusted basis for.......... 9 2 Uncollected tax............1 9 9Rental of dwelling unit used as 146, 160Business-relatedhome .................... 6 7 Guam: Abandonment of ..........1 0 1expenses ..........171, 172 Income from................ 6Funeral expenses........... 3 2 Acquisition debt (See alsoChildren, income from propertyGuide dogs:Funerals: Mortgages).............1 4 4given to.................2 0 5Deductibility as medicalClergy, payment for........ 4 6 Aged, home for............. 3 0Disaster victims receiving cash expense ................1 3 6Expenses .................1 9 3 As capital asset............ 9 7gifts....................1 6 2Contributions to cover, not Basis (See Sale of home)Holding period, determinationdeductible as charitable Business use of...........1 9 0o f ....................... 9 9Hdonations.............1 5 4 Closing costs.............1 0 1Holiday gifts................ 4 4Not deductible..........1 3 6 H.R. 10 plans................ 7 0 Cost of keeping up......... 2 1Incidental costs ofFuture interests: Handicapped persons  (See Worksheet............... 2 2business-related Disabilities, persons with)Definition of...............1 5 6 Damage to (See Casualtyexpenses ...............1 7 2Tangible personal property, Hawaii: losses)Not taxed.................. 8 7charitable deduction Standard meal Foreclosure...............1 0 1Proof of expenses (Table 26-2f o r......................1 5 6 allowance...............1 6 9 Improvements:summary) ...............1 7 7Head of household.......... 1 9 For medical care,Recordkeeping Cost of keeping up deductibility ...........1 3 6requirements............1 7 5G home .................... 2 1 Loans for...............1 4 6Reporting of expenses.....1 7 7Gains and losses (See also Worksheet............... 2 2 Jointly owned:
Table 26-3 showing forms toCapital gains or losses; Capital Filing requirements (Table Mortgage payments as
be used ..............1 8 0losses).............7 ,  20, 105 1-1)..................... 2 0 alimony...............1 2 4
Schedule A (Form 1040) forCasualty (See Casualty losses) How to file................. 2 1 Separate residences in and
deduction...............1 7 7Claim for refund for loss.... 1 7 Qualifying person.......... 2 1 alimony payments.....1 2 5
To reduce the publicCollectibles...............1 0 6 Qualifying person to file Taxes and insurance
debt..................... 1 5Financial institution’s a s....................... 2 2 premiums as
Girl Scouts:bankruptcy causing Summary (Table 2-1)..... 2 3 alimony...............1 2 4
deductible loss..........1 6 1 Charitable contributions Qualifying surviving spouse with Main home, defined .......1 0 0
Reporting of............1 6 5 t o ......................1 5 2 dependent child.......... 2 3 Office.....................1 9 0
Page 277

Page 280 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Household members  (See also Income taxes (See Federal Early distributions ( See EarlyHome (Cont.)
Head of household)........ 1 9 income tax) withdrawal from deferredPoints..................... 9 0
interest account)Alimony payments, spouses Federal (See Federal incomePossession before final
cannot be members of same Employer retirement plantax)settlement, rent not
household..............1 2 5 participants......1 ,  114, 115Foreign (See Foreign incomedeductible as
Establishing account.......1 1 3taxes)Household services........2 1 1interest.................1 4 6
Time of.................1 1 3State or local (See State or localHousehold workers (SeeRepossession.............1 0 1
Where to set upincome taxes)Domestic help)Security system...........1 9 4
account ..............1 1 3Income-producingHousehold workers, noSettlement fees...........1 0 1 Excess contributions.......1 1 9expenses ................1 9 1exemption for............. 2 5Tax home, determination for Figuring modified AGIIncome-producing property:Housing (See also Home;travel-related business (Worksheet 17-1).......1 1 6Deduction of interest on loanVacation homes)....21, 66, 68expenses ...............1 6 7 Forms to use:f o r......................1 5 0Alimony payments made toTenants in common, taxes and Form 1099-R for reportingcover...................1 2 4Indefinite absence from job:insurance premiums as distributions......40, 119Clergy..................... 4 6Work-related educationalimony.................1 2 4 Form 8606 for nondeductibleCooperative (See Cooperative during..................1 8 5Home equity loans: contributions..........1 1 2housing) Independent contractors:Car purchased by.........1 7 5 Inherited IRAs.........87, 116,Rental property (See Rental Homeworkers, deduction ofInterest deduction.........1 4 4 117, 118income and expenses) expenses ...............1 7 7Proceeds invested in Conversion to RothHurricanes (See also Disaster Indians:tax-exempt securities, interest IRAs .................1 1 8relief).....................1 6 3Employment credit, recapturenot deductible...........1 4 6 RequiredCasualty loss due to.......1 6 0 of:Home improvement distributions..........1 1 9Filing requirements (Tableloans.....................1 4 6 Interest on, treatment1-3).................... 8Home office: o f ......................1 1 2I Fishing rights.............. 8 7Capital gains exclusion....1 0 3 Married couples (See thisIcons, use of................. 3 Taxes collected by tribalTravel to another work heading: Spousal IRAs)Identification number, governments, deductionlocation.................1 7 4 Modified adjusted gross incomequalifying person........2 1 0 o f ......................1 4 0(MAGI):Home schooling: Illegal income: Individual retirement Computation of.........1 1 5Expenses not Reporting of................ 8 7 arrangements (IRAs) (See also Effect on deduction if covereddeductible..............1 2 7 Rollovers; Roth IRAs)...... 7 3 ,Impairment (See Disabilities, by employer retirementHomeowners’ associations: 112-123, 117, 121persons with) plan (Table 17-1)......1 1 5Charges ..................1 4 3 Administrative fees.......113,Impairment-related work Effect on deduction if notDeductibility (Table 114, 192expenses ......188, 189, 193 covered by employer22-1).................1 4 2 Age 591/2 forImprovements: retirement plan (TableCharitable contributions distribution..............1 2 0Real estate, adjustments to 17-2).................1 1 5t o .................152, 155 Exception to rule........1 2 0basis for................. 9 0 Worksheet 17-1.........1 1 6Homeworkers: Age 701/2:Rental property (See Rental NondeductibleDeduction of expenses....1 7 7 Contributions cut offincome and expenses) contributions............1 1 6Hope credit: a t ....................1 1 3Incidental expenses: Early withdrawal........1 2 0Can you claim (Figure Distributions requiredBusiness-related gifts......1 7 2 Tax on earnings on......1 1 635-A)...................2 2 9 a t ...............118, 120Travel-related.............1 6 9 Ordinary income, distributionsClaiming the credit........2 2 9 Compensation, defined....1 1 3Income: (See also Alimony; a s......................1 1 9Contribution limits.........1 1 3Comparison with lifetime Wages and salaries)....42-49, Penalties.................1 1 9
Age 50 or older,.........1 1 3learning chart (Table 85 Early distributions (See Early35-1)...................2 2 5 Under age 50,..........1 1 3Bartering................... 8 0 withdrawal from deferred
Contributions......... 7 ,  20, 21Eligible student............2 2 9 Canceled debts............ 8 0 interest account)
Designating year for whichFiguring the credit.........2 2 9 Constructive receipt of..... 1 1 , Excess contributions....1 1 9
contribution isMarried filing separately . . . 20, 58 Form 8606 not filed for
made .................1 1 3225 Excess reimbursement of nondeductible
Excess .................1 1 9medical expenses.......1 3 7Modified adjusted gross income contributions.....112, 116
Filing before contribution isGross ..................... 2 9(MAGI) .................2 2 8 Overstatement of
made .................1 1 3Illegal income.............. 8 8 nondeductibleTuition deduction and.....129,
Nondeductible..........1 1 6Interest.................... 5 2 contributions..........1 1 6226
Not requiredInvestment income........2 0 5 ProhibitedHospitals:
annually..............1 1 3Jury duty pay.............. 8 7 transactions..........1 1 9Charitable contributions to Roth IRA contribution forLife insurance proceeds.... 8 1 Required distributions, failurenonprofits...............1 5 2 same year.......113, 122Nonemployee to take..........118, 12050% limit on Time of.................1 1 3compensation............ 8 6 Prohibited transactions....1 1 9deduction.............1 5 7 Withdrawal before filing duePaid to agent............... 1 1 Recharacterization ofMeals and lodging provided for date..................1 1 8Paid to third party.......... 1 1 contribution.............1 1 8patients, deductibility....1 3 6 Cost basis...........116, 119Partnership................ 8 2 Reporting of:Payments for services for Prepaid.................... 1 1Deduction for.......... 7 ,  1 1 4Distributions............1 1 9specific patient, not Recovery .................. 8 2 Filing status and........1 1 5 Filing requirements (Tabledeductible as charitable Rental (See Rental income and Participant covered by 1-3).................... 8contributions............1 5 5 expenses) employer retirement plan Recharacterization ofServices fees, deductibility ofRoyalties.................. 8 3 (Table 17-1)..........1 1 5 contributions..........1 1 8medical expense........1 3 6 S corporation.............. 8 2 Participant not covered by Required distributions....117,Host or hostess............. 8 1 Tax exempt................ 2 9 employer retirement plan 118Hotels: Taxable income in excess of (Table 17-2)..........1 1 5 ExcessClub dues: $100,000 ................. 7 Phaseout ............ 1 ,  1 1 5 accumulations........1 2 0Not entertainment Taxable income less than Definition of...............1 1 3 Retirement savings contributionexpenses.............1 7 1 $100,000 ...............6 ,  7 credit...............20, 247Distributions:
Not considered dwelling Tips (See Tip income) Self-employed persons....1 1 3At age 591/2 .............1 2 0units..................... 6 6Underreported............. 1 6 Spousal IRAs.......112, 113,Required minimum
Household employees ......2 1 3Income aid payment........1 9 0 114, 115distributions (See this
Household furnishings: Taxability.................1 2 0heading: RequiredIncome from nonqualified
Antiques (See Collectibles) distributions) Distributions............1 1 9deferred compensation plans:
As capital assets........... 9 7 Additional tax on..........1 9 9 Divorced taxpayers........1 1 8 Time of taxation...........1 1 3
Page 278

Page 281 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Living expenses paid by, Interest payments (See also Married filing separately . . . 20,Individual retirement
possible income Mortgages) . . . 69, 82, 144-150 132arrangements (IRAs)(Cont.)
from....................1 6 3 One spouse hasAllocation of interest accordingTransfers permitted........1 1 6
itemized..............1 3 1Reimbursements: to use of loan ...........1 4 9To Roth IRAs......116, 118
Recovery .................. 8 2From casualty Canceled debt including .... 8 0Trustee administrative
Standard deduction to beinsurance.............. 8 5 Car loans.................1 7 5fees....................1 9 2
compared with..........1 3 2State insurer delinquency Deductions:Trustee-to-trustee State tax, for..............1 3 2proceedings preventingtransfers................1 1 6 Forms to use (Table
Itinerant workers:minimum pension 23-1).................1 5 0IRA to Roth IRA.........1 2 3
Deduction of expenses....1 7 7distributions.............. 7 5 Not allowed.............1 4 9Types of..................1 1 3 Tax home, determinationTrade of policies and Reporting of............1 4 9Withdrawals..........118, 120 o f ......................1 6 7annuities................ 9 5 Investment interest........1 4 8Early (See Early withdrawal ITINs (See Individual taxpayerWithholding againstfrom deferred interest Limit on deduction.......1 4 8 identification numbersbenefits.................. 1 2account) Personal interest not (ITINs))...................2 1 0Insurance agents:Required (See this heading: deductible.........144, 149
Deduction of expenses....1 7 7Required distributions) Reporting of
Insurance companies:Withholding........12, 37, 119 deductions..............1 4 9JState delinquency proceedings,Individual taxpayer Student loan interest Jewelry:IRA distributions not madeidentification numbers deduction...............1 2 7 As capital assets........... 9 7due to..................1 2 0(ITINs).................12, 33 Student loans deduction.....7 , Job (See headings starting withInsurance premiums: 20, 144, 149Individual taxpayers (See Single ‘‘Employee’’ or ‘‘Employer’’)Alimony when spouse owns lifetaxpayers) Unstated interest.......89, 95 Search:insurance policy.........1 2 4Information returns (See also Interference with business Expenses ...............1 9 0Casualty insurance......... 9 0Form 1099; Form W–2; Form operations: Job search:FHA mortgage insuranceW-2)....10, 11, 12, 37, 40, 42, Damages as income........ 8 6 Deduction of expenses forpremiums, not43, 46 Internal Revenue Service (IRS): Interviews............... 8 7deductible..............1 4 9Partnerships to provide..... 8 2 Fraud or misconduct of Joint accounts.............. 5 2Health insurance:Inheritance (See also Estate employee, reporting Dividends, reporting of...... 6 0Credit for workers displacedbeneficiaries).............. 8 6 anonymously ............. 2Joint return test............. 2 5by foreign trade orAdjusted basis for.......... 9 2 Mission of................... 3Joint returns:receiving pension fromHolding period, determination Underpayment penalties, Accounting period.......... 2 0PBGC ................1 3 4o f ....................... 9 9 computation by.......... 4 1 After separate return........ 2 1Deductible as medicalIRAs (See Individual retirement International employment (See Carryover of capitalexpense ..............1 3 6arrangements (IRAs)) Foreign employment) loss....................1 0 6Self-employed persons,Not taxed.................. 8 7 International organizations, Deceased spouse.......... 2 0deductible............1 3 9Inheritance tax: employees of ............. 4 7 Dependents on............. 2 8Home ....................1 9 4Deductibility of............1 4 3 Internet: Divorced taxpayers......... 2 0Homeowners’ .............1 9 4Deduction.................1 4 3 Electronic filing over (See E-file) Estimated tax.............. 3 8Liability...................1 8 9Standard meal allowanceInjured spouse.............. 1 3 Excess social security/railroadLife...................32, 194 rates...................1 6 9Claim for refund............ 1 3 retirement tax withholdingLife insurance.............1 3 6Inventory, retail............. 9 7Innocent spouse relief: credit...................2 4 8Alimony ................1 2 4Investment property:Form 8857 ................. 2 0 Extension for citizens outsideMedical.................... 3 0Rental property (See Rental U.S. ..................... 1 0Joint returns............... 2 0 Mortgage ............148, 194 income and expenses) Filing status................ 1 9Insider stock compensation Paid in advance............ 5 3 Form 1040EZ, use of........ 6Investments:from expatriated corporation:
Rental expenses, deduction of Fraud penalty.............. 1 8Classes as travelTax on....................1 9 9 premiums paid in Guardian of spouse, signingexpenses ...............1 7 0Insolvency: advance ................. 6 5 a s....................... 2 0Expenses .................1 4 9Canceled debt not deemed to Insurance proceeds: Injured spouse............. 1 3Fees .....................1 9 2be income............... 8 1 Innocent spouse........... 2 0Dividends, interest on....... 5 3 Property:Financial institution’s insolvency Investment income of childInstallment payments....... 5 7 As capital asset.......... 9 7causing deductible under age 14...........2 0 1Life........................ 5 7loss..................... 9 8 Definition...............1 4 8 Nonresident or dual-status alienIntellectual property, donationsReporting of............1 6 5 Like-kind exchanges..... 9 5 spouse .................. 2 0of .......................... 1Seminars .................1 9 4Installment agreements..... 1 5 Pensions or annuities....... 7 1Interest: Involuntary conversion (SeeInstallment sales............ 9 4 Worksheet............... 7 2Fees to collect............1 9 1 also Condemnation ofCapital gains and..........1 0 5 Personal exemption........ 2 4Frozen deposits............ 5 3 property)..................1 6 0Home sale ................1 0 4 Responsibility for.........2 ,  2 0Usurious................... 5 3Basis computation.......... 9 1Insulin: Separate return afterInterest income............. 5 2 Basis for depreciation....... 9 1Deductibility as medical joint..................... 2 1
Children: IRAs (See Individual retirementexpense ................1 3 6 Signing................13, 20
Gifts to children.........2 0 5 arrangements (IRAs)) Social security and railroadInsurance:
Dividends as............... 6 0Israel: retirement benefits....... 7 9Accident (See Accident
Form 1099-INT.........11, 40 Contributions to charitable State and local income taxes,insurance)
organizations in....152, 155 deduction of............1 4 0Frozen deposits, from...... 8 7Alimony deduction for, when
Itemized deductions: Judges, federal:Property purchase financedhome owned as tenants in
without adequate stated Employer retirement plancommon ................1 2 4 Adjusted gross income
interest, treatment of..... 9 5 coverage ...............1 1 4limiting............144, 184Casualty or theft loss,
Recovery of income, on..... 8 2reimbursement to adjust Changing from standard to Jury duty pay............... 8 7
loss....................1 6 2 itemized deduction (or viceReporting on Forms 1040,
versa)..................1 3 21040A, or 1040EZ......... 7Distributions from, reporting
Ko f ....................... 6 3 Choosing to itemize.......1 3 2Form 1040EZ filing
Keogh plans (See alsoDividends: threshold ............... 6 Form 1040 to be used....7 ,  8 2
Retirement plans).......... 7 0Interest on............... 6 3 Savings bonds (See also U.S. IE written on Form
savings bonds)........... 8 7 1040 ...................1 3 2Kickbacks ................... 8 7Form 1099-R to report
benefits.................. 4 0Securities, Form 1040 to be Limits on ..............20, 196 Kiddie tax (See Children,
used ..................... 7 subheading: Investment incomeLife (See Group-term life Charitable donations,
of child under age 14)insurance;  Life insurance) Tax refunds, from.......... 1 6 deduction for.........1 5 1
Page 279

Page 282 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Kidnapped children........2 3 6 Proceeds .................. 5 7Exclusion, limit of........... 4 9 Earned Income Credit...... 2 0
Qualified servicesAs income............... 8 1 Gross income filingLosses due to ransom.....1 6 0
defined.................. 4 8 requirements (TablePublic safety officers who diedQualifying child............. 2 6
1-1)..................... 2 0or were killed in line of duty,Long-term debtQualifying relative.......... 2 8
tax exclusion............. 8 2 How to file................. 2 0instruments............... 9 8
Surrender of policy for Itemized deductions....... 2 0 ,Long-term gains and losses
cash..................... 8 1 132(See Capital gains or losses)L
Withholding................ 3 7 One spouse has itemized soLosses (See Gains andLabels....................... 1 5
other must as well.....1 3 1Life insurance premiums.... 3 2 losses).................... 6 9Address correction......... 1 5
Joint state and local incomeCapital (See Capital gains orLife-care fees:Social Security Number to be
taxes filed, but separatelosses)Paid to retirement home andwritten on................. 2
federal returns..........1 4 0Casualty (See Casualty losses)designated for medical care,Labor unions: Medical and dentalGambling (See Gamblingdeductibility.............1 3 6Collective bargaining expenses ...............1 3 4winnings and losses)Lifetime learning credit:agreements.............. 3 6 Rollovers.................. 2 0Theft (See Theft losses)Can you claim (FigureContributions to, no charitable Social security and railroadLost property...............1 9 435-A)...................2 2 9deduction for............1 5 2 retirement benefits....... 7 7When deemed casualtyClaiming the credit........2 3 0Dues and fees........88, 155 State and local incomeloss....................1 6 1Comparison with Hope creditSick pay withholding under taxes...................1 4 0chart (Table 35-1).......2 2 5Lotteries and raffles (See alsounion agreements........ 3 6 Student loan interest deductionGambling winnings andEligible student............2 2 9Strike and lockout a n d ....................1 2 8losses).................... 8 7Figuring the credit.....229-230benefits.................. 8 8 Tenants by the entirety,No charitable deduction forMarried filing separately . . . 20,Trips from union hall to place of allocation of real estatetickets.............152, 155225work....................1 7 4 taxes...................1 4 2Lump-sum distributions..... 7 3Modified adjusted gross incomeUnemployment compensation Tuition deduction and......1 2 910-year tax option.......... 7 3(MAGI) .................2 2 8payments from........... 8 4 Married taxpayers (See alsoCapital gain treatment...... 7 3Tuition deduction and.....129,Land  (See also Real Joint returns; Tenants by theCost calculation............ 7 3226estate)..................... 8 9 entirety; Married filingElection of................. 7 3Like-kind exchange........1 0 4Depreciation not allowed separately).... 2 ,  6 ,  19, 20, 21,Form 4972 ................. 7 3Like-kind exchanges........ 9 5f o r....................... 6 8 60, 71Net unrealized appreciationBasis for depreciation....... 9 2Landlords (See Rental income Age 65 or older spouse:(NUA) ................... 7 3Qualifications.............. 9 1and expenses) Standard deduction.....1 3 1Rollovers of................ 7 3Limit on credit..............2 2 0Landscaping: Taxable and tax-free Blind spouse:Limit on itemized deduction:Cost of, when casualty or theft parts.................... 7 3 Standard deduction.....1 3 12005 changes............... 1loss involved.......160, 162 Child and dependent careLuxury travel:Limits:Larceny: credit...................2 1 1Travel expenses whenItemized deductions.......1 9 6Losses due to.............1 6 0 incidental business Deceased spouse (See alsoMiscellaneousLate filing.................2 ,  1 7 activities................1 7 0 Surviving spouse)..... 5 ,  1 9 ,deductions..............1 8 9Penalties............ 9 ,  17, 18 Work-related education, 20Line of credit for home: deduction ofLate payment: Definition of spouse forInterest...................1 4 4 expenses ...............1 8 7 purposes of alimony.....1 2 4Penalties on tax Liquidating distributions.... 6 2payments ................ 1 8 Dual-status alien spouse.... 2 0Living expenses: Educator expenses........1 2 7Public utility charges, not Insurance paying, possible Mdeductible..............1 4 9 Estimated tax.............. 3 8income from............1 6 3M&IE (Meals and incidental Filing status..............5 ,  1 9Laundry: Loans  (See also Debts; Student expenses) (See Incidental Form 1040EZ, use of........ 6Business-related travel loans)......... 7 ,  17, 127, 149 expenses;  Meal and lodging Gross income filingexpense ...........168, 169 Fees for, not expenses) requirements (TableLaw enforcement officers: deductible..............1 4 9Machinery (See also 1-1)..................... 2 0Life insurance proceeds when Home improvement Tools)....................1 7 4IRAs.................113, 114death in line of duty...... 8 2 loans...................1 4 6Rental for rental Spouse covered by employerLead-based paint removal: Home mortgages (See property................. 6 5 plan.............114, 115Deductibility as medical Mortgages) MACRS (Modified Accelerated Living apart................ 1 9expense ................1 3 6Origination fees (See Points) Cost Recovery System): Medical and dentalLeased property: Retirement plans, from..... 7 0 Rental property: expenses ...............1 3 4Casualty or theft loss......1 6 1Lobbying: Alternative minimum Deceased spouse’sLeased vehicles: Contributions for, not charitable t a x .................... 6 8 expenses.............1 3 6Car expenses.............1 7 5 deductions.........152, 155 MAGI  (See Modified adjusted Nonresident alienLeases (See Rental income and Lobbying expenses ........1 9 4 gross income (MAGI)) spouse ..............12, 20expenses) Local assessments: Mailing returns (See Tax returns) Performing artists.........1 8 1Legal expenses .......192, 194 Adjusted basis for.......... 9 0 Roth IRAs ................1 2 1Maintenance of rental propertyLiability insurance: Deductibility of............1 4 2 Signatures when spouse unable(See Rental income and
Reimbursements from...... 8 5 Rental property, deductions to sign................... 1 3expenses)
f o r....................... 6 5License and similar Social security or railroadMandatory retirement
fees......................1 9 3Local government employees: retirement benefits,age .......................2 1 8
Section 457 plans forLicense fees: taxability................. 7 6Market discount bonds...... 9 8employees (See Section 457Deductibility of............1 4 3 Transfer of home toMarried dependents, filing jointdeferred compensation plans) spouse .................1 0 1Life insurance (See also return..................... 2 5Local law violated........... 2 9 Transfers betweenGroup-term life insurance; Married filing separately..... 2 0 spouses .............92, 96Lockout benefits............ 8 8Accelerated death Carryover of capitalbenefits)............. 8 ,  44, 81 Travel expenses forLodges  (See Social clubs) loss....................1 0 6 spouse .................1 6 8Alimony, premiums when Lodging (See Meal and lodging Community property
spouse owns policy.....1 2 4 Mass transit passes,expenses) ................. 3 0 states................... 2 1
employer-provided........ 4 5Demutualization of Long-term care insurance Credits, treatment of........ 2 0
companies............... 9 6 Maternity clothes:contracts.................. 4 8Deductions:
Form 1099-R for surrender of Not deductible as medicalChronically ill individual.... 4 9 , Changing method from or to
policy for cash........... 8 1 expense ................1 3 682 itemized
Premiums .................1 9 4 deductions............1 3 2Deductibility of medical MCC (Mortgage credit
Treatment of............. 2 0Not deductible..........1 3 6 expense ................1 3 6 certificate)...............2 4 7
Page 280

Page 283 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Meal and lodging Medical savings accounts Effect on deduction if not Prepayment:
expenses ............168-172 (MSAs) (See also Archer covered by employer Allocation of
MSAs) ..................... 4 4 retirement plan (Table50% deduction for deduction.............1 4 4
17-2).................1 1 5business-related Penalty for, deductionAdditional tax on..........1 9 9
meals ........168, 169, 171 Worksheet 17-1.........1 1 6 o f ....................1 4 4Medicare AdvantageFigure 26-A summary of Lifetime learning credit.....2 2 8 Points..................1 4 6M S A .................... 8 7rules.................1 7 2 Roth IRAs, computation Reported on FormMedical expenses paid forWork-related f o r......................1 2 11098 .................1 4 8decedent from........1 3 6education.............1 8 7 Phaseout (Table Proceeds used for business orMedicare (See also SocialBusiness-related entertainment 1 7–3 ) ................1 2 2investment, deductionsecurity and Medicareincluding...........168, 171 Worksheet 17-2.........1 2 2 o f ......................1 5 0taxes)............... 8 ,  43, 47Business-related travel expense Money market Refinancing...............1 4 6Benefits................... 8 5including................1 6 8 certificates................ 5 3 Refund of interest:Medicare A, when deductible asForm 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to Money market funds ........ 6 2 Reported on Formmedical expense........1 3 6fill out.............180, 181 Money orders: 1098 .................1 4 8Medicare Advantage MSA (SeeLodging..............168, 169 Payment of tax............. 1 4 Treatment of............1 4 6Medical savings accountsProof of expenses.........1 7 5 Penalty if not honored...... 1 4 Seller-financed............1 0 4(MSAs))Table 26-2 summary....1 7 7 More information (See Tax help) Mosques  (See Churches,Recordkeeping Medicare B, when deductible asMortgage: temples, etc.)requirements.......168, 175 medical expense........1 3 6 Relief...................... 8 0Motels (See Hotels)Reporting of...............1 7 7Medicare tax...............1 9 9Mortgage credit certificate Moth damage:Table 26-3 showing forms toMedicare taxes, not (MCC) ....................2 4 7Not casualty losses........1 6 0be used ..............1 8 0 support ................... 3 2Mortgage insurance Moving expenses:Restaurant receipts........1 7 5Medications: premiums ................1 4 8Standard meal Standard mileage rates...... 1Deductibility as medical Basis in property not toallowance.....168, 169, 178 MSAs  (See Medical savingsexpense ................1 3 6 include.................. 9 0Amount of..............1 6 9 accounts (MSAs))Member of household or Mortgage interest credit....2 4 7Areas outside continental Multiple supportrelationship test........... 2 8 Carryforward..............2 4 7U.S...................1 6 9 agreement ................ 3 2Members of the uniformed Form 8396 ................1 4 4Prorating on partial days of Municipal bonds............ 5 7services or Foreigntravel.................1 7 8 How to take...............2 4 7Museums:Service...................1 0 2Taking turns paying for meals or Recapture ................2 4 7Charitable contributionsMembership fees (See specificentertainment...........1 7 1 Reduced deduction........2 4 7 t o ......................1 5 2type of organization)Transportation workers....1 6 9 Mortgages: (See also Musicians andMentally incompetent personsDeduction limits.........1 7 2 Points)...............146, 149 entertainers..............1 9 0(See also Disabilities, personsMedical and dental Alimony, payments as.....1 2 4Mutual funds...............1 9 1with; Elderly or disabled, creditexpenses ............134-139 Assistance payments...... 8 5 , Adjusted basis of shares.... 9 3for).................. 7 ,  48, 70Adjusted gross income and limit 144 Allocated expenses........1 9 1Signing of return byof deduction............1 3 4 Assumption of.............. 8 9 Capital gains............... 6 2court-appointedAdopted child.............1 3 5 Fees not included in Dividends from............. 6 2representative........... 1 3Alimony payments made to basis.................. 9 0Exempt-interestMetals, precious (See Gold andcover...................1 2 4 Credit certificate (MCC) from dividends................ 6 3silver)Contributions to cover, not state or local Nonpublicly offered........1 9 2deductible as charitable Mexico: government.............1 4 4 Publicly offered............1 9 1donations...............1 5 4 Contributions to charitable Discounted mortgage Undistributed capitalDamages including........1 3 8 organizations in....152, 155 loan..................... 8 0 gains...................1 0 6Decedent’s expenses......1 3 6 Ending early, treatment ofMexico, resident of.......... 2 5 Credit for tax on.........2 4 9Deduction.................1 3 4 points..................1 4 8Mileage deduction forChecklist for deductible Federally subsidized mortgage,work-relatedexpenses (Table recapture of tax paid on homeeducation ................1 8 4 N21-1).................1 3 6 purchased with..........2 4 7Mileage rates (See StandardDependent’s expenses....1 3 4 Name change ...........11, 41FHA mortgage insurancemileage rates)Determination of date Nanny tax (See Domestic help)premiums and VA fundingMilitary (See Armedpaid....................1 3 4 fees, not deductible.....1 4 9National Housing Act:forces)....................1 0 2Form 1040, Schedule A, for Insurance premiums (See Mortgage assistance...... 8 5 ,Military personnel:reporting................1 3 8 Mortgage insurance 144Earned Income Credit.....2 3 6Future expenses, settlement premiums) National of the UnitedMineral royalties............ 8 4including................1 3 8 Interest: States..................... 2 5Ministers (See Clergy)Health insurance credit....2 4 9 Definition...............1 4 4Native Americans (See Indians)Health insurance premiums Miscellaneous Form 1098 (interest Negligence penalties........ 1 8(See Health insurance) deductions...............1 8 9 statement)........69, 148 Net investment income.....1 4 8Included expenses: Federal employees buying back Refund of................ 8 2Net operating losses:Individuals covered......1 3 4 sick leave................ 4 9 Interest credit (See Mortgage Casualty or theft losses....1 6 5Meals and lodging related to Outplacement agency interest credit) Refund of carryback........ 1 7receiving medical fees..................... 4 3Interest deduction: New Jersey Nonoccupationalcare...............137, 169 Computation for amountMissing children: Disability BenefitMedical care, defined......1 3 4 deductible (FigurePhotographs of, included in IRS Fund .....................1 4 1Purpose of expenses......1 3 4 23-A).................1 4 4publications............... 2Reimbursements, treatment New Jersey UnemploymentSale of home...........1 4 4Mistakes (See Errors)o f ..................49, 137 Compensation Fund .....1 4 1Schedule A (Form 1040) toModified adjusted gross incomeWork-related..............2 1 2 New job, trade, or business:deduct ...............1 4 9(MAGI):Medical devices: Employment agencyLate payment charges,Child tax credit limits.......2 2 1Deductibility of............1 3 6 fees....................1 9 0deduction of............1 4 4Education credits..........2 2 8Medical insurance (See Accident Job search expenses......1 9 0Lender’s charges for
Hope credit...............2 2 8insurance) Travel expenses..........1 9 0services................1 4 8
IRAs, computation for:Medical insurance Work-related educationMore than one borrower (not
premiums ................. 3 0 expenses ...............1 8 6spouse), reporting of interestEffect on deduction if covered
deduction...............1 5 0Medical research organizations: by employer retirement New York Nonoccupational
Charitable contributions plan (Table 17-1) .....115, Preparation costs for notes or Disability Benefit
t o ......................1 5 2 1 1 6 deeds of trust...........1 4 8 Fund .....................1 4 1
Page 281

Page 284 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nightclubs: Officials: Parochial school tuition: Failure to include social security
number ..............12, 18Cover charges, 50% limit on No charitableLocal government.........1 8 9
Failure to pay tax........... 1 8deduction...............1 7 2 deduction...............1 5 5State.....................1 8 9
Failure to provide social securityNobel Prize.................. 8 8 Partners andOffset against debts.......8 ,  1 3 number or TIN:partnerships.............1 9 1Nominees ...............53, 58 OID (See Original issue discount Alimony deduction.......1 2 6Capital gains or lossesDividends that belong to (OID)) Home seller andfrom....................1 0 6someone else........60, 63 Oil, gas, and minerals: purchaser............1 5 0Income .................... 8 2Nonaccountable plans for Future production sold...... 8 4 To dividend payers....... 6 0employee Investment interest........1 4 8Royalties from............. 8 4 Form 8606 not filed forreimbursements .....178, 179 Related partySchedule C or C-EZ...... 8 4 nondeductible IRANoncapital assets........... 9 7 transactions............. 9 6 contributions.......112, 116Sale of property interest.... 8 4Nonemployee Pass-through entities ......1 9 1 Fraud...................... 1 8Older taxpayers:compensation ............. 8 6 Passive activity............. 9 4 Frivolous return............ 1 8Credit for the elderly.......2 1 7Nonrefundable credits......2 4 6 Losses ...............21, 149 Interest on................. 1 4Online help:Nonresident aliens........... 6 Exception for real estate IRAs......................1 1 9EITC Assistant............2 3 2Due dates .................. 9 professionals.......... 6 9 Early distributions.......1 2 0Options .................46, 62Estimated tax.............. 3 8 Investment interest Excess contributions....1 1 9Form 1040EZ, use of........ 6 a n d ..................1 4 8Charitable contributions, date Form 8606 not filed foro f ......................1 5 7Individual taxpayer identification Rental property.......... 6 9 nondeductiblenumber (ITIN)............ 1 2Ordinary dividends (See Reporting of gains or contributions.....112, 116Spouse .................... 1 2Dividends) losses..................1 0 5 Overstatement ofJoint returns not Ordinary gain............... 9 7Patents: nondeductibleavailable.............. 2 0 Infringement damages...... 8 6Ordinary gain and loss (See contributions..........1 1 6Separated............... 2 1 Gains and losses) Royalties.................. 8 4 Required distributions, failureTransfers between spouses Organ donors: to take...............1 1 8Patents, donations of......... 1when one spouse is Late filing............ 9 ,  17, 18Deductibility of medical Patronage dividends........ 6 3nonresident alien....... 9 6 Exception................ 1 8expense ................1 3 6Payment of tax..... 2 ,  8 ,  14, 15,Standard deduction........1 3 1 Late payment.............. 1 8Original issue discount 17Tuition deduction and......1 2 9 Negligence................ 1 8(OID)...................... 5 7By check or money order....2 ,Waiver of alien status....... 4 7 Reportable transaction14, 39Adjusted basis and......... 9 3Nontaxable payments: understatements......... 1 8By credit card........ 2 ,  10, 14Discounted debtCredit for the elderly or the Roth IRAs:By electronic means........ 1 4instruments.............. 9 7disabled................2 1 8 Conversion contributionsCredit card...........14, 39Form 1099-OID ............ 4 0Nontaxable trades (See Tax-free withdrawn in 5-yearElectronic Federal TaxOrigination fees (See Points)exchanges) period................1 2 3Payment SystemOther taxes.................1 9 8Northern Mariana Islands: Excess contributions....1 2 2(EFTPS) ...........14, 39Out of work................2 1 7Income from................ 6 Substantial understatement ofFunds withdrawal....14, 34,Outplacement services...... 4 3 income tax............... 1 8Not-for-profit activities...... 8 5 39Deduction of agency Tax evasion................ 1 8Notary fees.................. 8 6 Delivery services..........2 ,  9fees..................... 4 3 Tips, failure to report........ 5 0Not deductible as Estimated tax..........14, 39Over-the-counter drugs: Underpayment of estimatedinterest.................1 4 8 Installment agreements (See t a x ..........34, 39, 41, 202Not deductible as medicalNotes: Installment agreements) Willful failure to file......... 1 8expense ................1 3 6As obligations of Late payment penalties..... 1 8 Withholding............36, 37individuals............... 9 8Overpayment of tax (See also Payable to ’’United States Pensions (See also Annuities;Tax refunds)............... 1 3Discounted............43, 57 Treasury‘‘................. 2 Railroad retirement benefits;Received for services....... 4 3Overseas work (See Foreign Vouchers ..............39, 40 Rollovers)........70-75, 73, 76employment)Nursery schools (See Child and Payments ..................1 9 9457 plans (See Section 457dependent care credit) Overtime pay................ 3 6 Disaster relief.............. 8 5 deferred compensation plans)Nursing care: Oxygen equipment and oxygen: Payroll deductions (See Payroll Clergy..................... 4 6Employment taxes for worker Deductibility as medical deductions) Contributions:providing medical care, expense ................1 3 6Charitable contributions via: Elective deferraldeductibility of..........1 3 6 Recordkeeping amounts ................ 1For healthy baby, not deductible requirements.........1 5 8 Retirement savingsas medical expense.....1 3 6P contribution credit..... 2 0 ,Withholding (See Withholding)Wages for, deductibility as Paper vs. electronic return (See 247Payroll taxes (See Social securitymedical expense........1 3 6 E-file) Taxation of.............. 4 6and Medicare taxes;Nursing homes: Paperwork Reduction Act of Cost computation.......... 7 1Withholding)Insurance for care in (See 1980 ....................... 2 Decedent’s unrecoveredPeace Corps allowances.... 4 7Long-term care insurance Parental responsibility (See investment in............ 1 2Pell grants:contracts) Children) Definition of............74, 75Tuition deduction, effectMeals and lodging, deductibleParents, divorced or Disability pensions......... 4 8o n......................1 3 0as medical expense.....1 3 7 separated ............26, 238 Credit for................ 7 0Penalties:Nutrition Program for the Divorced parents..........2 3 8 Early distributions:Accuracy-related........... 1 8Elderly.................... 8 5 Exceptions to tax on...... 7 4Parking fees: Alimony deduction, failure toNutritional supplements: Qualified retirement plans,Business-related travel....1 7 4 provide social securityNot deductible as medical exceptions for.......... 7 4Commuting expense.......1 7 3 number of recipient......1 2 6expense ................1 3 6 Tax on................... 7 4Employer-provided fringe Backup withholding......... 3 7 Elderly persons, creditbenefit: Check not honored......... 1 4 f o r....................... 7 0Exclusion fromO Civil penalties.............. 1 7 Elective deferralincome ................ 4 5OASDI ....................... 8 5 Criminal................... 1 8 limitation................. 4 6Medical-related travel......1 3 7Occupational taxes.........1 9 0 Deductibility..........149, 194 Employer plans:
Sports arena, business-relatedDeduction of: Defenses .................. 1 8 Benefits from previous
entertainment subject to 50%Taxes that are deductible Estimated tax (See this employer’s plan.......1 1 5
limit....................1 7 2(Table 22-1)..........1 4 2 heading: Underpayment of Rollover to IRA..........1 1 7
Parks and recreation facilities:Office rent, deductibility estimated tax) Situations in which no
of ........................1 9 1 coverage.............1 1 5Charitable contributions Failure to furnish tax shelter
Office, use of home as.....1 9 0 t o ......................1 5 2 registration number....... 1 8 Estimated tax.............. 7 0
Page 282

Page 285 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Theft of (See Theft losses) Mortgage interest ( See Reporting tips toPensions (Cont.)
Mortgages) employer ................ 5 0Excess accumulation, tax on Personal property taxes:
Rent paid in advance....... 6 4(See also this heading: Publication 584:Car taxes.................1 7 5
Required Casualty and theft losses,Prescription medicines:Deduction of..............1 4 3
distributions).........74, 75 workbook for............1 6 0Deductibility as medicalSchedule A, C, E, or F (Form
Foreign employment expense ................1 3 6Publication 78:1040) ................1 4 3
contributions............. 7 1 List of qualified organizations forPresidential Election CampaignTaxes: (See Personal property
Form 1099-R............... 4 0 charitableFund ...................... 1 2taxes)
General Rule for nonqualified contributions............1 5 1Presidentially declaredPersonal representatives (See
plans and qualified plans for Publications (See Tax help)disasters (See Disaster relief)Fiduciaries)
recipients over 75 Puerto Rico:Prevention of cruelty to childrenPersons with disabilities (Seeyears.................... 7 1 Residents of................ 6or animals organizations:Disabilities, persons with)Inherited pensions.......... 8 7 Charitable Pulitzer Prize................ 8 8Photographs:Joint returns............... 7 1 contributions............1 5 1Punitive damages:Casualty or theft lossLoans from plan............ 7 0 Price reduced after As income ................. 8 6claims..................1 6 2Lump-sum distributions (See purchase .................. 8 1Physician certification......2 1 7also Lump-sum Principal residence (See Home)Physician’s statement......2 1 7distributions)............. 7 3 QPrivacy Act and paperworkVeterans..................2 1 8Military (See Armed forces) Qualified dividends......61, 63reduction information...... 2Place for filing.............4 ,  1 5Multiple pension plan Qualified domestic relationsPrivate delivery services.....2 ,Planes: (See Aircraft;  Airplanes)benefits..............70, 71 orders (QDROs):9Plants and trees:Partly taxable payments.... 7 1 Rollover of retirement planPrivate schools:Cost of, when casualty or theftReporting of................ 7 1 distribution............... 7 4Charitable deduction forloss involved.......160, 162Required distributions: Qualified education expenses:tuition..................1 5 5Plastic surgery:At age 701/2 .............. 7 5 Education credits......226-228Prizes and awards (See alsoNot deductible as medicalExcise tax for failure to take Work-related education,Bonuses) ...........36, 42, 88expense whenminimum businessExclusion from income...... 4 2cosmetic................1 3 6distributions........... 7 5 deduction...........186-187Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarForm 5329 for failure to Points......................1 4 6 Qualified individuals:prizes................... 8 8receive required Basis in property not to Under age 65 and retired onScholarship prizes.......... 8 8minimum,.............. 7 5 include.................. 9 0 permanent and totalProbationary work periods:State insurer delinquency Definition.................1 4 6 disability................2 1 7Travel expenses during....1 6 7proceedings preventing Excess points.............1 4 8 Qualified plans: (See RetirementProfessional licenseminimum Form 1098 reporting.......1 4 8 plans)................73, 117fees......................1 9 4distributions........... 7 5 Guide to determine if points Qualified student loan (SeeProfessionalState and local government deductible in year paid Student loan interest deduction)Reputation...............1 9 4employees (See Section 457 (Figure 23-B)...........1 4 6 Qualified tuitionProfessionals:deferred compensation plans) Limits on deduction........1 4 8 programs ................. 8 8Entertainment expenses forUnrecovered investment Main home purchase, special Additional tax on..........1 9 9attending associationi n ......................1 9 3treatment of.............. 9 0 Filing requirements (Tablemeetings ...............1 7 1Withholding.....12, 37, 70, 73 Mortgage ending early.....1 4 8 1-3)...................... 8Profit-sharing plans:Pentagon attacks (See Terrorist Paid by seller.............1 4 8 Qualifying child............. 2 5Form 1099-R............... 4 0attacks) Refinancing...............1 4 6 Qualifying person:Lump sums (See Lump-sumPer capita taxes: Schedule A (Form 1040) to Child and dependent caredistributions)Deductibility of............1 4 3 deduct.............149, 150 credit...................2 0 8Withholding............12, 37Per diem: Second home .............1 4 6 Qualifying relative........... 2 8Promissory notes:Allowance or Settlement statement shows as Charitable contributions, datereimbursement....177, 178, charged for o f ......................1 5 7179 mortgage ...............1 4 6 RProof of businessCharitable organization service,Political campaign Raffles...................... 8 7expense ..................1 7 5f o r......................1 5 4expenses ...........193, 194 No charitable deduction forTable 26-2 summary.......1 7 7Federal rate...............1 7 8Political contributions (See tickets.............152, 155Proof of loss...............1 6 1High-low rate method to Campaign contributions) Railroad retirement benefitsProperty (See Personal property;compute ................1 7 8Political conventions: (See also Excess withholdingReal estate)................ 8 9Standard meal Travel expenses..........1 7 0 credit)................70, 246Found ..................... 8 7allowance...............1 6 9Post office employees: Deductions related to....... 7 9Stolen..................... 8 8Performing artists: Rural mail carriers.........1 7 4 Employer retirement plansProstheses:Artists, performing.........1 8 9 different from...........1 1 5Postponed tax deadlines: Deductibility of medicalBusiness expenses........1 8 1 Equivalent tier 1 (social securityDisaster areas............1 6 5 expense ................1 3 6Work-related education equivalent benefitPostponement of gain:expenses ...............1 8 8 Protective clothing.........1 9 1 (SSEB)) .............76, 88Sale of home..............1 0 2Permanent and total Psychiatric care: Estimated tax.............. 7 7Adjusted basis........... 9 1disability.................2 1 7 Specially equipped medical Form RRB-1099 ........40, 76Power of attorney.......13, 20 centers, deductibility ofPersonal exemption.....24-33, Income ..................... 7Preferred stock: expense ................1 3 624 Joint returns............... 7 9Redeemable at a Public assistanceJoint return................ 2 4 Lump-sum election......... 7 7premium ................. 6 2benefits................... 8 4Limits...................... 2 0 Married filing separately . . . 20,Premature distributions (SeePhaseout ...........20, 24, 32 Public debt: 77Early withdrawal from deferredSpouse’s exemption........ 2 4 Gifts to reduce............. 1 5 Repayment of benefits...... 7 7interest account)Personal injury suits: Public parks and recreation Reporting of................ 7 7Prepaid: facilities:Damages from ............. 8 6 Taxability of............76, 77
Insurance.................. 5 3Charitable contributions Withholding................ 3 7Personal interest:
Preparer’s fee: t o ......................1 5 2Not tax deductible.......1 4 3Not deductible.......144, 149
Deductible amount........1 9 1Public transportation passes, Withholding for............. 7 7Personal property (See also
employer-provided........ 4 5Preparers of tax returns..... 1 3 Railroad retirement tax (RRTA)Casualty losses)..........1 6 3
Public utilities (See Utilities) ( See also Excess withholdingPrepayment:As capital assets........... 9 7
credit)....................2 4 6Insurance premiums:Rental income from......... 8 3 Publication 1244:
Taxes (See Personal property Deductibility as medical Daily record of tips (Form Railroad Unemployment
taxes) expense ..............1 3 6 1244).................... 5 0Insurance Act............. 4 9
Page 283

Page 286 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Real estate (See also Vacation Charitable Received after deducting Equipment rental for rental
homes; Mortgages).....66, 68, contributions .......151, 158 loss ....................1 6 3 property................. 6 5
144 Returning excess for business Expenses paid by tenant.... 6 4Copies of returns........... 1 6
As noncapital assets........ 9 7 expenses ...........36, 179 Fair rental price............ 6 6Destroyed records.........1 7 6
Basis...................... 8 9 Tax year of inclusion for Home possession before finalDocumentary evidence....1 7 5
insuranceCanceled business debt, settlement, rent notElectronic records of tips.... 5 0
reimbursement..........1 6 3treatment of.............. 8 1 deductible asForm W-2 .................. 1 6
Theft losses...............1 6 2 interest.................1 4 6Casualty loss.............1 6 4 Gambling .................. 8 7
Travel advances..........1 7 9 Improvements.............. 6 4Closing costs.............. 8 9 Incomplete records........1 7 6
Types of..................1 6 2 Defined.................. 6 5Definition of................ 8 9 Meal expenses:
Unclaimed ................1 8 7Increase due to higher realDivision of real estate Actual cost..............1 6 8 estate taxes............1 4 3taxes...................1 4 1 Work-related educationStandard meal expenses ...............1 8 7 Deductibility (TableFair market value (FMV).... 8 9 allowance............1 6 8 22-1).................1 4 2Form 1099-S to report sale Reinvestment plans:Period of retention.....15, 177 Insurance premiums paid inproceeds ..........105, 142 Dividends used for......... 6 1Tip income................. 5 0 advance ................. 6 5Holding period, determination Related partyTravel expenses.....168, 175 Local assessments......... 6 5o f ....................... 9 9 transactions.............. 9 6Work-related education Losses from rental real estateItemized charges for services Indirect transactions........ 9 6expenses ...............1 8 8 activities.............21, 69not deductible...........1 4 3 Like-kind exchanges....95, 96Recovery of amounts Not-rented-for-profitPoints....................1 4 6 Multiple property sales orpreviously deducted: property................. 6 5Progressive deterioration, not trades................... 9 6Itemized deductions........ 8 2 Part interest................ 6 4casualty loss............1 6 0 Relationship test........26, 28Mortgage interest refund.... 8 2 Part of property rented...... 6 5Real estate-related items not Relative, qualifying.......... 2 8Over multiple years......... 8 2deductible..............1 4 2 Personal property rental.... 8 3Relief fundStolen property, adjustment ofRental (See Rental income and Personal use of propertycontributions............1 9 4theft loss...............1 6 1expenses) including vacationRelief funds (See also DisasterTax refunds................ 8 2 home .................... 6 6Settlement fees............ 8 9 relief).....................1 6 3Red Cross: Allocation ofTaxes (See Real estate taxes) Religious organizations (SeeBlood donations not expenses.............. 6 4Transfer taxes............1 4 3 also Churches, temples, etc.;deductible.........152, 155 Pre-rental expenses........ 6 4Real estate investment trusts Clergy)........ 6 ,  46, 152, 154Charitable contributions Property or services received(REITs): Charitable contributionst o ......................1 5 2 instead of money......... 6 4Dividends from............. 6 2 t o .................151, 152Redeemable ground rent: Purchaser’s payment of rent,Undistributed capital 50% limit onDeduction as mortgage not included in propertygains...................1 0 6 deduction.............1 5 7interest.................1 4 4 basis.................... 9 0Credit for tax on.....62, 249 Written statement notRedemption of bonds ....... 9 4 Repairs.................... 6 4Real estate taxes: needed ...............1 5 3State and local bonds, before Reporting of................ 6 9Alimony deduction for, when Remainder interest, salematurity................. 9 7 Sale of rental property...... 6 4home owned as tenants in of ........................1 0 4Redemption of stock........ 9 4 Schedule E for reportingcommon ................1 2 4 Rental income:Refinancing: o f ....................... 6 9Assessments (See Local Uncollected rent............ 6 4 Security deposits........... 6 4Fees for, not part of propertyassessments) Rental income andbasis.................... 9 0 Self-employment tax, whenBasis of property and....... 8 9 expenses ...............64-0 applicable............... 6 9Points....................1 4 6When not reimbursed by Advance rent............... 6 4 Tax return preparation...... 6 5Refund of expenses (See nameproperty seller......... 9 0 Canceling lease, payments Tax shelters and at-riskof benefit)Cooperative housing (See f o r....................... 6 4rules.................... 6 9Cooperative housing) Refundable credits....246, 248 Capitalized costs........... 6 5 Time to report.............. 6 4deduction of...............1 4 1Refunds ....................1 9 9Change of property to rental Travel expenses associatedList of deductible taxes (TableMortgage interest, treatment u s e..................65, 93 with management and22-1).................1 4 2 o f ......................1 4 6Deductions............64, 68 maintenance............. 6 5Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form State tax................... 8 2 Losses that exceed passive Vacant rental property...... 6 41040) ................1 4 3Taxes (See Tax refunds) income ................ 6 9Reorganizations, corporate:Refund, treatment of.......1 4 2 Tuition refunds............1 3 0 Depreciation (See also Nontaxable trade ofTaxes (See Real estate taxes) Regulated investment Depreciation)........64, 68 stock.................... 9 5Rebates (See Refunds) companies: Dwelling unit not used as Repairs:Recapture: Undistributed capital gains, home .................... 6 8Basis, effect on.........89, 90Alimony...................1 2 6 credit for tax on.........2 4 9 Dwelling unit used as Cost of, when casualty or theftReporting on Form Reimbursement  (See also Per home .................... 6 6 loss involved............1 6 21040 .................1 2 6diem; Recovery of amounts Capital gains Rental expenses........... 6 4Credits................ 7 ,  2 4 8previously deducted)...... 8 2 , exclusion.............1 0 3Repayment:Filing requirements (Table 177, 178, 179, 180 Computation of income and Amount previously included in1-3).................... 8 Accountable plans, definition expenses.............. 6 8 income .................1 9 3New markets credit, filing o f ......................1 7 7Days used for repairs and Repayments:requirements (Table Allocation of...............1 8 0 maintenance........... 6 81-3)...................... 8 Social security benefits.... 7 7 ,Casualty losses...........1 6 2 Determining if used as 83Taxes ....................1 9 9Employee business home .................. 6 6UnemploymentRecharacterization: expenses ........36, 42, 172 Division of expenses..... 6 8 compensation............ 8 4IRA contributions..........1 1 8 Gain from casualty or theft Donation of use of Reporting:Recording fees: loss....................1 6 2 property............... 6 7 Rollovers.................1 1 7Basis to include............ 8 9 Health insurance, Figuring days of personal
Repossession of home .....1 0 1Recordkeeping: reimbursement in later u s e ................... 6 6
Requests for information fromGambling .................1 9 3 year....................1 3 8 Limit for rental losses..... 6 9
IRS ........................ 1 6General requirements.....1 8 9 Medical and dental Main home
Sale of home..............1 0 2 expenses ...............1 3 7 Required minimumdetermination.......... 6 6
Savings bonds used for distributions (See IndividualExcess reimbursement Rented for 15 days or
education................ 5 7 retirement arrangements (IRAs);flowchart (Figure more .................. 6 8
Pensions)21-A).................1 3 8Recordkeeping Rented for fewer than 15
Mileage (See Standard mileagerequirements.............. 1 5 days ...........64, 66, 68 Rescue squad members:
rates)Business travel Shared equity financing Life insurance proceeds when
expenses ..........168, 175 Personal expenses ........1 7 7 agreement............. 6 6 death in line of duty...... 8 2
Page 284

Page 287 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Research expenses: Excess accumulation, tax on Gain from publicly traded S
(See also this heading: securities................ 9 9College professor.........1 9 0 S corporations.............1 9 1Required Inherited IRAs.............1 1 7Reservists: Capital gains or lossesdistributions).........74, 75 Lump-sum distributions..... 7 3 from....................1 0 6Deduction for transportation Foreign employment Married filing separately.... 2 0 Related partyexpense ................1 7 3 contributions............. 7 1 Nontaxable amounts........ 7 3 transactions............. 9 6IRAs......................1 1 5Form 1099-R............... 4 0 Partial rollovers...........1 1 7 Shareholders.............. 8 2Residency: General Rule for nonqualified Qualified domestic relations Investment interest......1 4 8Home outside U.S. (See and qualified plans for orders for distribution of Safe deposit box...........1 9 2Citizens outside U.S.) recipients over 75 retirement plan funds..... 7 4Salaries (See Wages andMain home, defined.......1 0 0 years.................... 7 1Reporting: salaries)Residency test.............. 2 6 Inherited pensions.......... 8 7 From employer’s plan to Sale of home (See also RealResident aliens: IRAs (See Individual retirement I R A ..................1 1 7estate)........69, 88, 100-104Earned Income Credit.....2 3 4 arrangements (IRAs)) IRA to IRA..............1 1 7 Abandonment .............1 0 1Joint return................ 7 1Estimated tax.............. 3 8 Retirement bond Adjusted basis............1 0 1Keogh plans............... 7 0IRA distributions, withholding redemption.............. 7 4 Amount realized...........1 0 0Loans from plan............ 7 0from....................1 1 9 Surviving spouse........... 7 4 Basis.....................1 0 1Lump-sum distributions (SeeSocial security number Taxability............117, 121 Capital gains exclusion....1 0 2also Lump-sum(SSN) ................... 1 1 Time limits (60-day Division of real estatedistributions)............. 7 3Spouse treated as.......... 2 1 rule)....................1 1 7 taxes...................1 4 1Military (See Armed forces) Treatment of..............1 1 7Resorts: Employer, payment by.....1 0 0Multiple pension plan Waiting periodTravel expenses when Federal subsidy, recapturebenefits..............70, 71 between ................1 1 7incidental business o f ......................1 0 4Partly taxable payments.... 7 1 Withholding tax............. 7 3activities................1 7 0 Foreclosure orReporting of................ 7 1Roth IRAs: (See also repossession...........1 0 1Restaurant employees: Required distributions...... 7 5 Rollovers)........121-123, 123 Form 1099-S..............1 0 0Tips (See Tip income) At age 701/2 .............. 7 5 Age: Gain or loss, figuring of....1 0 0Retail installment contracts: Excise tax for failure to take Distributions after age Interest deduction forFinance charges, not minimum 591/2 ..................1 2 3 mortgage ...............1 4 4deductible..............1 4 9 distributions........... 7 5 Interest paid to seller, reportingNo limit forRetail inventory............. 9 7 Form 5329 for failure to o f ......................1 5 0contributions..........1 2 1receive required minimumRetention of records (See Jointly owned home.......1 0 1No required distributionretirement planRecordkeeping requirements) Land .....................1 0 0a g e ..................1 2 3distributions........... 7 5Retired Senior Volunteer Main home, defined.......1 0 0Compensation, defined....1 2 1State insurer delinquencyProgram .................. 4 7 More than one home......1 0 0Contribution limits.........1 2 2proceedings preventingRetirees (See also Retirement Sold in 2-year period....1 0 3Age 50 or older,.........1 2 2minimumplans)..................... 7 0 Option to buy.............1 0 0Under age 50,..........1 2 2distributions........... 7 5Armed forces: Period of ownership andContributions..............1 2 1Section 457 plans (See SectionTaxable income.......... 4 7 u s e.....................1 0 2No deduction for.......112,457 deferred compensationWithholding.............. 3 4 Points paid by seller.......1 4 8121plans) Postponed gain from....... 9 1Retirement of bonds....94, 98 Roth IRA only...........1 2 2State and local government Recordkeeping............1 0 2Rollover of amount Time to make...........1 2 2employees (See Section 457 Reporting of gain..........1 0 3redeemed ............... 7 4 To traditional IRA for samedeferred compensation plans) Seller-financedRetirement planning year.............113, 122Withholding.....12, 37, 70, 73 mortgage ...............1 0 4services................... 4 5 Conversion...............1 2 3Retirement savings contribution Selling price...............1 0 0Retirement plans (See also Definition of...............1 2 1credit....................2 4 7 Settlement fees or closingAnnuities; Railroad retirement Distributions:Adjusted gross income costs...................1 0 1benefits; Rollovers; Roth Qualifiedlimit..................... 2 0 Trading homes............1 0 1IRAs)...........20, 70, 73, 76 distributions..........1 2 3Returns, tax (See Tax returns) Transfer to spouse.......101,457 plans (See Section 457 Effect of modified AGI onRevenue stamps: 103deferred compensation plans) contributions (TableBasis to include............ 8 9 Undeducted points........1 0 017-3)...................1 2 2Clergy..................... 4 6Revolving charge accounts: Sale of property..........94-99Establishing account.......1 2 1Contributions............... 4 6 Finance charges, not Adjusted basis............. 9 4Excess contributions.......1 2 2Credit for (See Retirement deductible..............1 4 9 Amount realized............ 9 4Failed conversions andsavings contribution credit)Rewards .................... 8 8 Basis other than cost....... 9 5recharacterizations.....118,Elective deferral Rhode Island Temporary Business property that has123amounts ................ 1 Disability Benefit undergone change ofIRA transfer to.......116, 118Taxation of.............. 4 6 Fund .....................1 4 1 u s e...................... 9 3Modified adjusted gross incomeCost computation.......... 7 1 Cash payment ............. 9 5Robbery: (MAGI) .................1 2 1Debt payoff included in..... 9 5Decedent’s unrecovered Losses due to.............1 6 0 Computation (Worksheet Definition of................ 9 4investment in............ 1 2Rollovers...............73, 117 17-2).................1 2 2Fair market value (FMV).... 9 5Definition of............74, 75 Beneficiaries, Phaseout (Table Figuring gain or loss........ 9 4Disability pensions......... 4 8 restrictions............... 7 4 1 7–3 ) ................1 2 2Form 1099-B............... 9 4Definition of...............1 1 7Credit for................ 7 0 Penalties.................1 2 3Like-kind exchanges........ 9 5Direct rollovers............. 7 3Early distributions: Conversion contributions Personal items............. 8 8Eligible distributions........ 7 3Exceptions to tax on...... 7 4 withdrawn in 5-year Redemption of stock........ 9 4Excess due to incorrect rolloverTax on................... 7 4 period................1 2 3Rental property that hasinformation.............1 2 0Elderly persons, credit Excess contributions....1 2 2 undergone change ofFrom 403 plan to IRA......1 1 7f o r....................... 7 0 Spousal contributions......1 2 1 u s e...................... 9 3From employer’s plan to Taxability.................1 2 3Elective deferral Transfers betweenI R A ....................1 1 7limitation................. 4 6 Withdrawals...............1 2 3 spouses ................. 9 6From IRA to IRA..........1 1 7 Excess contributions....1 2 2Employer plans: Sales and exchanges:From IRA to Roth IRA.....1 2 3 Not taxable........112, 123Benefits from previous Bonds ..................... 5 7From Roth IRA to Roth Rounding off dollars........ 1 2employer’s plan.......1 1 5 I R A ....................1 2 3 Sales tax:
Royalties.................... 8 3Rollover to IRA..........1 1 7 From section 457 plan to Basis to include ............ 8 9
RRTA tax (See also ExcessSituations in which no I R A ....................1 1 7 Car purchase.............1 7 5
withholding credit).........2 4 6coverage.............1 1 5 From SIMPLE IRA to Roth Deductibility of (Table
Estimated tax.............. 7 0 I R A ....................1 2 3Rural mail carriers.........1 7 4 22-1)...................1 4 2
Page 285

Page 288 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sales to related persons, Bought at various times, how toSelf-employment tax.......1 9 8 Federal employees buying
exception ................1 0 4 indicate.................1 0 5 back..................... 4 9Deduction of..............1 4 3
List of deductible taxes (TableClaim for refund............ 1 7Salvation Army (See Charitable Sick pay:
22-1).................1 4 2contributions) FECA payments ............ 4 9Constructive ownership of
Rental income............. 6 9stock, determination Income .................... 4 3Saturday, deadline falling
o f ....................... 9 6Seller-financed Railroad Unemploymenton ......................... 3 9
mortgages ...............1 0 4 Insurance Act............ 4 9Convertible stocks andSavings:
Withholding................ 3 6bonds ................... 9 5Seminars:Bonds .................54, 59
Fractional shares........... 6 2 Investment-related........1 9 4Signatures.................. 1 3Bonds used for
Agent, use of............... 1 3Holding period, determinationeducation................ 5 6 Senior Companion
o f ....................... 9 8 E-file Forms 8453 and 8453-OLProgram .................. 4 7Certificate..............53, 58
for signatureJoint owners, reporting of Separate returns (See MarriedSchedule (See Form 1040)
requirements.............. 8dividends................ 6 0 filing separately)1 (Form 1040A), Part I...... 5 8
Joint returns............... 2 0Nontaxable trades.......... 9 52 of Form 1040A..........2 1 3 Separated parents......26, 238
Mentally incompetent....... 1 3Options................46, 623 of Form 1040A..........2 1 8 Separated parents, special Parent for child............. 1 3Preferred stock, redeemable atForm 1040, A-F, R, SE (See rule......................2 3 8Physically disabled......... 1 3a premium............... 6 2Form 1040) Separated taxpayers........ 1 9 Self-Select PIN acting asK-1: Redemption of stock ........ 9 4 Filing status............20, 21 electronic signature....... 8Beneficiaries receiving Reinvestment plan, dividends IRAs......................1 1 4Silver (See Gold and silver)income from estate or used for................. 6 1Medical and dental expenses of
SIMPLE plans:trust................... 6 0Rollover of gain from publicly children of..............1 3 5
Contribution limits........... 1Partnership income....... 8 2 traded securities......... 9 9 Mortgage interest.........1 4 4
Rollover to Roth IRA.......1 2 3S corporation income..... 8 2 Sale expenses, how to adjust Nonresident alien
Simplified employee pensionsK-1, Form 1041............ 5 2 f o r......................1 0 5spouse .................. 2 1
(SEPs):R of Form 1040...........2 1 8 Personal exemption........ 2 4Short-term gains and
IRAs as...................1 1 3X: losses..................1 0 5Separation agreements:
Tax rates for single Simplified Method:Stock appreciation rights.... 4 3 Defined for purposes of
persons ............... 1 9 Computation of taxablealimony.................1 2 4Stock rights:
Y-1: annuity.................. 7 1As capital assets......... 9 7SEPs  (See Simplified employee
Worksheet............... 7 1Tax rates for married filing pensions (SEPs))Dividends as............. 6 2
jointly................. 1 9 Single taxpayers:Series EE and E savings bondsHolding period, determinationY-2: Charitable contributions to, no(See U.S. savingso f ..................... 9 9
Tax rates for married filing deduction for.......152, 154bonds)..................... 5 4Worthless................ 9 4separately............. 2 0 Filing requirements.......... 5Series HH and H savingsSurrender of stock.......... 9 4 Filing status..............5 ,  1 9Schedules A–F, R, SE (Form bonds ..................... 5 4Tax-exempt:1040) (See Form 1040) Form 1040EZ, use of.....6 ,  1 9Series I savings bonds...... 5 4Home equity loan proceeds Gross income filingScholarships.........27, 29, 32 invested in............1 4 6Service Center requirements (TableScholarships and addresses ................. 1 5Interest incurred to produce 1-1)...................... 5fellowships...............6 ,  7 income from..........1 4 8Service charges............1 9 2Small businesses:Earned income Interest to purchase or carry, Credit card payment of Capital gains or losses fromincluding................1 3 2 not deductible.........1 4 9 taxes.................... 1 4 stock of.................1 0 7Exclusion from gross Deductibility of............1 4 9Tenants by the entirety owning, Keogh plans............... 7 0income .................. 8 8 Employer treating as wages forreporting of dividends..... 6 0 Losses on stock of......... 9 8Teaching or research tip income............... 5 0Tenants in common owning,fellowships............... 8 8 Smoking cessation programs:reporting of dividends..... 6 0Service Corps of Retired Deductibility as medicalTuition deduction, effect Executives (SCORE) ...... 4 7Worthless securities........ 9 4 expense ................1 3 6o n......................1 3 0 Services:Security deposits: Social clubs:Scientific organizations: No charitable deduction forRental property, for......... 6 4 Contributions to, no charitableCharitable contributions value of.................1 5 2Self-employed persons: (See deduction for............1 5 2t o ......................1 5 1 Property received for....... 9 1also Self-employment Dues:Scrip dividends............. 6 3 Settlement date of securitiestax).......................1 4 3 Not entertainmentSecond homes  (See Vacation transaction................ 9 8Corporate directors as...... 8 6 expenses.............1 7 1homes) Settlement fees:Definition................... 6 Social security and MedicareSecond mortgages: Real propertyFiling requirements (Table taxes (See also ExcessInterest...................1 4 4 transactions............. 8 91-3)...................... 8 withholding credit)........199,Section 1202 exclusion: Sale of home..............1 0 1Foreign government or 213, 246Capital gains or losses Severance pay .............. 4 3international organizations, 2005 changes............... 1under...................1 0 7 Accrued leave payment..... 4 3U.S. citizens employed Reporting of (Table 1-3)..... 8Section 1244 stock: Outplacement services..... 4 3b y........................ 6 Support, not included in..... 3 2Losses on ................. 9 8 Shipping:Gross income............... 5 Social security benefits..... 2 9Section 1250 gains: Business-related travelHealth insurance costs, Deductions related to....... 7 9Sale of real property subject expense ................1 6 8deductible as medical Employer retirement planst o ......................1 0 7 Shipwrecks:expense ................1 3 9 different from...........1 1 5Section 179 deductions: Casualty loss due to.......1 6 0Homeworkers, deduction of Estimated tax.............. 7 7Adjustment to basis for..... 9 0 expenses ...............1 7 7Short tax year: Foreign employer........... 4 7Car expenses.............1 7 5 Change in annual accountingIRAs......................1 1 3 Form SSA-1042S for
Section 457 deferred period..................1 3 1Meal allowance not permitted nonresident aliens........ 7 6
compensation plans ...... 7 0 when more than 10% Short-term debt instruments: Form SSA-1099 ........40, 76
Early distributions from..... 7 4 ownership of Government obligations..... 9 7 Group-term life insurance, taxes
Required distributions...... 7 5 corporation.............1 7 8 Ordinary gain.............. 9 7 owed on .................. 8
Rollovers: Ministers.................... 6Short-term gains and Income ..................... 7
To IRAs ................1 1 7Nonemployee losses................97, 105 IRAs for recipients of
compensation............ 8 6Section 72(m)(5)............1 9 9 Priority in deducting.......1 0 6 benefits.................1 1 5
Qualified retirement plans Sale or trade of property held 1Securities (See also Brokers; Joint returns............... 7 9
f o r....................... 7 0year or less.............. 9 8Capital gains; Lump-sum election......... 7 7
Travel outside U.S.........1 7 0Dividends).........11, 60, 105 Sick leave: Married filing separately . . . 20,
Adjusted basis for.......... 9 3 77Work-related education Cash payments for unused
As capital assets........... 9 7 expenses ...............1 8 8 leave...................1 3 6Paid by employer........... 4 3
Page 286

Page 289 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard meal Stock options ...........46, 62 Qualifying relative.......... 2 9Social security benefits (Cont.)
allowance ......168, 169, 178Repayment of benefits..... 7 7 , Stockholders (See also Surveys:
Amount of ................1 6 983 Securities)................. 1 7Property basis to include.... 8 9
Areas outside continental Debts...................... 8 1Repayments ..............1 9 2 Surviving spouse:
U.S.....................1 6 9Reporting of................ 7 7 Stockholders’ meeting Annuity.................... 7 5
Prorating on partial days of expenses ................1 9 4Filing status................ 1 9Taxability of............76, 77
travel...................1 7 8 With dependent child..... 2 3Stocks (See Dividends;Tips, taxes owed on......... 8
Standard mileage rate: Gross income filingSecurities)Withholding for.........37, 77
Work-related requirements (TableStolen funds:Not deductible..........1 4 3
education..........184, 187 1-1)...................... 5Reporting of................ 8 8Social security number Life insurance proceeds paidStandard mileage rates.....1 7 4Stolen property (See Theft(SSN) ..................... 1 1 t o ....................... 8 12005 rates.................. 1 losses).................... 8 8Correspondence with IRS, Rollovers by............... 7 4Business-related miles....166, Stop-smoking programs:include SSN............. 1 2 Tax (See Estate tax)174 Deductibility as medicalDependents................ 1 1 Synagogues  (See Churches,Car expenses.............1 7 4 expense ................1 3 6Exception................ 1 1 temples, etc.)Charitable organization service,Storms (See also DisasterFailure to include auto use for.............1 5 4 relief).....................1 6 3penalty.................. 1 2Medical reasons for use of Casualty loss due to.......1 6 0Form SS-5 to request Tc a r ................134, 137 Straddles:number .................. 1 1 Tables and figures: (See alsoNot allowed...............1 7 4 Interest from..............1 4 8Nonresident alien Worksheets)............... 3 2State: Strike benefits............... 8 8spouse .................. 1 2 Adjusted basis, examples ofObligations, interest on..... 5 7Student loan interest deduction:Resident aliens............. 1 1 (Table 13-1)............. 9 0Officials..............189, 193 Loan repaymentSocial security numbers Alimony requirementsState bar associations: assistance..............1 2 8(SSNs) ...................2 1 0 (instruments executed afterBar review courses........1 8 6Student loans:Alimony recipient’s number 1984) (Table 18-1)......1 2 5Charitable contributions Cancellation of debt........ 8 1required................1 2 6 Capital gain rates (Tablet o ......................1 5 5Interest deduction......7 ,  127,Child’s...................... 2 16-1)...................1 0 6State or local governments: 144, 149Number to be obtained at Car expenses, reporting ofBonds, tax-exempt......... 9 7 Academic period........1 2 7birth................... 3 3 (Table 26-3)............1 8 0Charitable contributions Amount of deduction....1 2 8Dependents................. 2 Casualty and theft losses:t o .................151, 152 Claiming...........128, 129Dividend payers to use..... 6 0 Deduction limits for personalEmployees: Double deduction notEarned Income Credit....233, property (TableSection 457 plans for (See allowed...............1 2 8236 25-1).................1 6 5Section 457 deferred Eligible educational Deduction of loss, when toLabel, number need to be compensation plans) institution.............1 2 8 take (Table 25-2)......1 6 5written in................. 2 Unemployment Eligible student.........1 2 7 Charitable contributions,Penalty for failure to provide: compensation.......... 8 4 Expenses of deductibility of (TableTo dividend payers....... 6 0 Fee-basis officials: dependent............1 2 8 24-1)...................1 5 2Social Security Card.......2 3 3 Business expenses Features of (Table Children’s income:Sonic booms: o f ....................1 8 1 19-1).................1 2 7 Inclusion on parent’s returnCasualty loss due to.......1 6 0 Work-related education Married filing (Figure 31-A).........2 0 1Special needs children: expenses.............1 8 8 separately............. 2 0 Investment income more thanAdoption credit............2 4 6State or local income taxes: Qualified student $1,600, reporting of (FigureSpouse  (See also Married Deduction of..............1 4 0 loan..................1 2 7 31-B).................2 0 5taxpayers) (See also Surviving List of deductible taxes (TableWorksheet..............1 2 9 Education credits:spouse)................19, 20 22-1).................1 4 2Interest, defined...........1 2 7 Can you claim (FigureDisabled, qualifying for Schedule A (Form 35-A).................2 2 9Student claimed as exemptiondependent care 1040) ................1 4 3 Comparison chart (Tableon tax return of anothercredit...................2 1 0Electronic returns filed with 35-1).................2 2 5person..................1 2 8
Student...................2 1 0 federal.................... 8 Entertainment expenses:Students ...................1 5 7
SSN  (See Social security number Exception to deduction....1 4 0 50% limit (FigureCredit (See Education credits)(SSN)) 26-A)............171, 172Federal changes, effect Defined.................... 2 6
Stamp taxes: Proof of (Table 26-2)....1 7 7o n....................... 1 7Exemption from
Real estate transactions Reporting of (TableForm W-2 to show withheld withholding.............. 3 6
a n d ....................1 4 3 26-3).................1 8 0taxes...................1 4 0Foreign.................... 2 5
Estimated tax, who must makeStamps  (See Collectibles) Interest on, not Foreign students..........1 5 3
payments (Figuredeductible..............1 4 9Standard deduction.......131, Loans (See Student loans)
4–A ) .................... 3 8Itemized deductions.......1 3 2132 Scholarships (See Scholarships Filing requirements:Joint state and local returns but2005 changes............... 1 and fellowships)
Dependents (Tablefederal returns filedAge 65 or older............1 3 1 Tuition deduction (See Tuition) 1-2).................... 6separately..............1 4 0 Tuition programs, qualified (SeeAmount ...................1 3 1 Gross income levels (TableMarried filing Qualified tuition programs)Blind persons.............1 3 1 1-1).................... 5separately..............1 4 0 Work-related education (SeeChanging from itemized to Other situations requiringRefunds, treatment of.....140, Work-related education)standard deduction (or vice filing (Table 1-3)........ 8141 Substantial gainfulversa)..................1 3 2 Gift expenses:State or local taxes: activity...................2 1 7Comparison with itemized Proof of (Table 26-2)....1 7 7Refunds ................... 8 2Substitute forms............ 1 0deduction amount.......1 3 2 Reporting of (TableStatute of limitations:Defined...................1 3 1 Suggestions for 26-3).................1 8 0Claim for refund............ 1 3 publication................. 3Dependents...............1 3 2 Head of household, qualifyingClaim for refunds........... 1 6Sunday, deadline fallingFinal return of person (Table 2-1)....... 2 3Statutory employees.......1 7 7 on ......................... 3 9decedent ...............1 3 1 Individual retirementStillborn child............... 2 6Increase in................1 3 1 Supplemental wages ........ 3 6 arrangements (IRAs):
Stock appreciationMarried filing separately: Supplies: Figuring modified AGI
rights..................... 4 3One spouse has Regularly used or consumed in (Worksheet 17-1).....1 1 6
itemized..............1 3 1Stock bonus plans.......... 3 7 ordinary course of trade or Modified AGI, effect on
business................. 9 7Not allowed in certain Stock certificates: deduction if covered by
situations...............1 3 1 Support test: retirement plan at workCharitable contributions, date
(Table 17-1)..........1 1 5Purpose of................1 3 1 o f ......................1 5 7Qualifying child............. 2 7
Page 287

Page 290 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax refunds: Tax shelters: Social security number (SeeTables and figures:
Social security numberAgreement with IRS extending Penalty for failure to furnishIndividual retirement
(SSN))assessment period, claim registration number ....... 1 8arrangements (IRAs): (Cont.)
based on ................ 1 7 Rental property and at-risk Taxpayer identificationModified AGI, effect on
Bad debts.................. 1 7 rules.................... 6 9numbers (TINs) .....208, 210deduction if not covered by
Business tax credit Tax year (See also Accounting Child and dependent careretirement plan at work
carrybacks............... 1 7 periods).................9 ,  1 1credit...................2 1 1(Table 17-2)..........1 1 5
Cashing check............. 1 3Roth IRAs, effect of modified Childcare provider.........2 1 1Tax-exempt:
Check’s expiration date..... 1 3AGI on contributions (Table Bonds and other Individual (ITIN) ............ 3 3
Claim for...............16, 1717-3).................1 2 2 obligations............... 5 7 Social Security Numbers (See
Limitations period........ 1 6Roth IRAs, modified AGI Income ...................1 9 5 Social Security Numbers
Litigation................ 1 7(Worksheet 17-2).....1 2 2 Interest.................... 5 7 (SSNs))
Interest deductions, forms to Direct deposit.............. 1 3 Obligations: Teachers:
use (Table 23-1)........1 5 0 Erroneous refunds.......... 1 6 Adjusted basis........... 9 3 Expenses, deduction of......7 ,Meal expenses and 50% limit Federal income tax Organizations: 127, 190(Figure 26-A)......171, 172 refunds.................. 8 2 Related party Work-relatedMedical and dental expenses: Financially disabled........ 1 7 transactions........... 9 6 education..........185, 186Checklist for deductible Foreign tax paid or Section 457 deferred Telephones ................1 9 4expense (Table accrued ................. 1 7 compensation plans.... 7 0 Business-related travel21-1).................1 3 6General rules............... 8Tax-exempt income ......... 2 9 expense ................1 6 8Reimbursement, excess Inquiries.................... 8Tax-exempt obligations: Fraud or misconduct of IRSalgorithm (Figure Interest on..........16, 17, 53 Adjusted basis for.......... 9 3 employee, number for21-A).................1 3 8Late filed returns.........2 ,  1 7Tax-free exchanges: reporting anonymously.... 2Mortgage deduction (Figure Less than $1............... 1 3 Definition of................ 9 1 Tax return to include phone23-A)...................1 4 4Limits...................... 1 7Holding period, determination number ................... 2Points, to determine if Exceptions............... 1 7 o f ....................... 9 8Temples  (See Churches, temples,deductible in year paid More or less than Taxable exchanges: etc.)(Figure 23-B)...........1 4 6 expected ................ 1 3 Definition of................ 9 1Temporary absence from job:Roth IRA and modified adjusted Net operating loss Taxes: (See also Sales Work-related educationgross income (MAGI) carryback................ 1 7 tax)....140-143, 140, 175, 198 during..................1 8 4phaseout (Table Offset: Alternative minimum.......1 9 9Temporary absences ....26, 281 7–3 ) ..................1 2 2Against debts..........8 ,  1 3Business taxes, deductionStudent loan interest deduction Temporary job assignments:Against next year’s o f ......................1 4 0(Table 19-1)............1 2 7 Travel expenses..........1 6 7t a x ................13, 39 Deduction of..............1 4 0Tax returns: Tenants (See Rental income andPast-due.................8 ,  1 6Schedules to use........1 4 3Due dates (Table 1-5)..... 9 expenses)Real estate taxes, treatment Types of taxes deductibleSteps to prepare (Table By the entirety............. 5 2o f ......................1 4 2 (Table 22-1)..........1 4 21-6)................... 1 0Reduced ................... 1 7 In common ................. 5 2Estate (See Estate tax)Taxes that are deductible (TableState and local income tax Tenants by the entirety:Estimated (See Estimated tax)22-1)...................1 4 2 refunds............140, 141 Alimony, no deduction for taxesTravel and transportation Excise (See Excise taxes)State liability, effect on...... 1 7 and insurance paid on homeexpenses: Federal income taxes, notWithholding................. 6 owned as ...............1 2 4Examples of deductible deductible..............1 4 3Worthless securities........ 1 7 Dividends, reporting of...... 6 0expenses (Table Foreign taxes.............1 4 0Claim for refund.......... 9 4 Real estate taxes, allocation2 6–1 ) ................1 6 8 Income tax. deductionTax return preparation: when filingLocal transportation (Figure o f ....................1 4 1Rental expenses........... 6 5 separately..............1 4 226-B).................1 7 3 General sales taxes (SeeTax returns (See also Due dates; Tenants in common:Proof of (Table 26-2)....1 7 7 General sales taxes)Joint Returns; Alimony deduction for taxes andReporting of (Table Gift taxes.................1 4 3Signatures).......... 9 ,  13, 20 insurance paid on home26-3).................1 8 0 How to figure..............1 9 8Aliens...................... 6 owned as ...............1 2 4Tuition deduction (Table Income taxes, deductionAmended (See also Form Dividends, reporting of...... 6 019-2)...................1 2 9 o f ......................1 4 01040X) .............16, 132 Terminal illness:Claiming dependent’s Indian tribal government taxes,Attachments to returns...... 1 2 Accelerated payment of lifeexpenses (Table deduction of............1 4 0Child...................... 1 3 insurance proceeds (See19-3).................1 3 0 Inheritance tax............1 4 3Copies of.................. 1 6 Accelerated death benefits)Volunteers, deductibility of Kiddie tax (See Children,Dating of................... 1 3 Viatical settlements......... 8 1contributions (Table subheading: InvestmentFiling of (See also Filing24-2)...................1 5 4 Termite damage:income of child under age 14)requirements)............. 4Work-related education (Figure Not casualty losses........1 6 0Nanny tax (See Domestic help)Forms to use................ 627-A)...................1 8 5 Terrorist attacks:Not deductible............1 4 3Free preparation help........ 9Tax counsel fees...........1 9 1 Personal property taxes: Casualty loss due to.......1 6 0How to file................. 1 0Tax Counseling for the Car taxes...............1 7 5 Disability payments for injuriesJoint returns (See JointElderly..................... 9 Deduction of............1 4 3 from, tax exclusion....... 7 0Returns) Real estate taxes (See RealTax credits (See Credits) Disability pensions for federalMailing of................1 ,  1 5estate taxes) employees............... 4 8Tax evasion................. 1 8Paid preparer.............. 1 3 Sales tax.................. 8 9Theft losses......160-165, 191,Tax figured by IRS.........1 9 9 Payment with.............. 1 4 Withholding................ 3 4 192Tax help.............2 ,  3 ,  9 ,  2 6 5Phone number to be Taxes, not support.......... 3 2 $100 Rule ................1 6 4Tax Counseling for the included.................. 2
Taxis: Adjusted basis inElderly.................... 9 Preparation fees..........1 9 1
Business-related travel property.........90, 91, 161Volunteer counseling (VolunteerPrivate delivery services.....2 ,
expense ................1 6 8Amount of loss............1 6 1Income Tax Assistance 9
Standard mileage rate not Appraisals...........161, 162program) ..............9 ,  4 7Request copy of, Form
allowed.................1 7 4Cost of cleaning up or makingTax preference items.......1 9 9 4506 .................... 1 6
Taxpayer Advocate.........2 6 5 repairs..................1 6 2Request transcript of, FormTax rates:
Costs of photographs andTaxpayer Assistance4506-T .................. 1 6Married filing jointly (Schedule
appraisals..............1 6 2Center ..................... 2Steps to prepare (TableY–1 ) .................... 1 9
Deduction of loss:1-6)..................... 1 0Taxpayer identification numberMarried filing separately
When to take (TableThird party designee......2 ,  1 2(TIN):(Schedule Y–2).......... 2 0
25-2).................1 6 5Transcript of............... 1 6 Adoption (ATIN)............ 1 2Single person filing (Schedule
X ) ....................... 1 9Who must file.......... 4 ,  5 ,  6Individual (ITIN)............ 1 2 Definition of theft..........1 6 0
Page 288

Page 291 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rental for use on rental U.S. travel ..............1 6 9 Work-relatedTheft losses (Cont.)
property................. 6 5 education..........186, 187Unproved amounts......1 7 9Fair market value of stolen
Visiting clients orproperty................1 6 1Tornadoes (See also Disaster Traveling salespersons:
customers............1 7 2Form 4684 to be filed......1 6 0 relief).....................1 6 3 Deduction of expenses....1 7 7
Charitable organization service,Casualty loss due to.......1 6 0 Tax home, determinationInsurance proceeds, treatment
deduction for............1 5 4 o f ......................1 6 7o f ......................1 6 2Total support................ 3 0
Commuting expenses .....1 7 3Net operating losses.......1 6 5 Treasury bills, notes, andTour guides: Employer-provided commuterProof of loss..............1 6 1 bonds ..................... 5 7Free tour for organizing vehicle................ 4 5Property used partly for Treasury Inspector General:tour..................... 8 7Conventions..............1 7 0business and partly for Telephone number to reportTrade Act of 1974: Delegates, deduction ofpersonal purposes......1 6 4 anonymously fraud orTrade readjustment allowances unreimbursedRecovered stolen misconduct of IRSunder.................... 8 4 amount ...............1 5 4property................1 6 1 employee ................. 2Trade associations: Deductible expenses......1 6 7Reimbursement ...........1 6 2 Treasury notes.............. 5 3Meetings and entertainment Examples of (TableReporting of gain or Treaties:expenses ...............1 7 1 26-1).................1 6 8loss....................1 6 5 Foreign charitableTrade of property (See also Sale Definition of...............1 6 6Third parties: organizations, contributionsof property)................ 9 4 Employer-providedAlimony payments made t o ......................1 5 2Definition of................ 9 4 vehicles................. 4 4t o .................124, 125 Trees and plants:Form 8824 for reporting..... 9 5 Estimates of..............1 7 5Designee for IRS to discuss Cost of, when casualty or theftLike property and money Expenses paid forreturn with.............2 ,  1 2 loss involved.......160, 162transferred...........92, 95 others..................1 9 5Income from taxpayer’s property Trust beneficiaries:Like-kind exchanges....91, 95 Federal crime investigators orpaid to................... 1 1 Dividends received by...... 6 0Nontaxable exchanges.... 9 1 , prosecutors.............1 6 7Threats: Losses of trust............. 8 695 Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how toLosses due to.............1 6 0 Receiving income fromHolding period, determination fill out..................1 8 0Tickets (See Entertainment trust.................86, 87o f ..................... 9 8Fringe benefits............. 4 5expenses) Rollover restrictions........ 7 4Partially nontaxable Getting from home to temporary
exchange ............92, 95Tip expense: Trustees:workplace when multiple
Reporting of................ 9 5Business meal or entertainment Administrative fees........1 9 2regular workplaces......1 7 2
Taxable exchange,activity, 50% deduction I R A.......................1 9 2Going home on days off from
defined.................. 9 1limit....................1 7 2 IRAs:temporary
Business travel Trade-in of car.............1 7 5 Fees ..............113, 114assignment.............1 6 7
expense ...........168, 169 Notification ofGoing to business meetingTrading date of securities
recharacterization.....1 1 8Tip income...............50-51 away from regulartransaction................ 9 8
Transfer from trustee toAllocated tips..........36, 51 workplace ..............1 7 2Traditional IRAs (See Individual
trustee..........116, 123Going to family home......1 6 6Daily record of tips......... 5 0 retirement arrangements
Indefinite assignment......1 6 7Electronic tip record........ 5 0 Trusts (See also Trust(IRAs))
Job search expenses....... 8 7Form 4070A for daily beneficiaries)......60, 86, 199Traffic violations:
Medical purposes, for.....136,records.................. 5 0 Grantor trusts.............. 8 6Fines not deductible.......1 7 5
137Noncash tips...........50, 51 Income .................... 8 6Transfer taxes: Mileage rates (See Standard Child beneficiary........2 0 5Penalty for failure to Property basis to include.... 8 9 mileage rates)report................... 5 0 Investment interest........1 4 8Real estate transactions New employment ..........1 9 0 Related party transactions withReporting on tax return..... 5 1 a n d ....................1 4 3No main place of business or fiduciaries............... 9 6Reporting tips to Transit passes.............. 4 5 work....................1 6 7employer ................ 5 0 TTY/TDD information.......2 6 5Transportation expenses (See Nonaccountable plans,Failure to report to Tubal ligation:Travel and transportation definition of.............1 7 9employer............8 ,  5 0 Deductibility as medicalexpenses) Parking fees:Form 4070 for............ 5 0 expense ................1 3 6Transportation workers: Business-relatedService charges paid by Tuition (See also HopeMeal expenses............1 6 9 travel.................1 7 4employer as wages....... 5 0 credit)...............129, 229Deduction limits.........1 7 2 Commuting expense ....1 7 3Social security and Medicare Alimony payments made toForm 2106 or 2106-EZ, how Employer-provided fringetax: cover...................1 2 4to complete...........1 8 0 benefit................ 4 5Employer reporting for Charitable deduction notTravel and transportation Medical-relatedpurposes of............ 5 0 allowed for paying......152,expenses ...........166-170, travel.................1 3 7Filing requirements (Table 155172-175 Probationary work1-3).................... 8 Credit (See Education credits)Advances ............177, 179 periods.................1 6 7Uncollected............... 8 Deduction for.......... 7 ,  1 2 9Allocation of types of Proof of expenses.........1 7 5Tip Rate Determination and Claiming forcosts..............168, 176 Summary (TableEducation Program....... 5 1 dependent............1 3 0Bona fide business 26-2).................1 7 7Tip-splitting or tip-pooling Refund of expenses.....1 3 0purpose ................1 6 8Recordkeepingarrangements............ 5 0 Eligible educational institution,Business associates.......1 6 8 requirements.......168, 175Uncollected taxes.......... 5 1 defined.................1 2 9Business travel............1 6 8 Rental property maintenanceWithholding............36, 50 Expenses that do not$75 or less..............1 7 5 and management, for..... 6 5Employee contributing qualify..................1 3 0Confidential information Reporting of...............1 7 7t o ..................... 5 0 Qualified programs (Seea n d ..................1 7 6Table 26-3 showing forms toUnderwithholding....36, 51 Qualified tuition programs)Employees’ be used ..............1 8 0Title insurance: Related expenses,expenses.............1 6 8 Resorts or cruise ships....1 7 0 defined.................1 2 9Property basis to include.... 8 9 Incidental expenses.....1 6 9 School children, transportingTuition and fees deduction:Title to property: Proof of business o f ....................... 8 8Refund of expenses.......1 3 0Abstract fees, property basis to purpose ..............1 7 6 Summary of rules (Figureinclude.................. 8 9 Tuition programs, qualified (SeeReceipt not readily available 26-B)...................1 7 3
Attorneys’ fees: Qualified tuition programs)to prove..............1 7 5 Tax home, determination
Property basis to Tuition, benefits under GISpouse or o f ......................1 6 7
include................ 8 9 Bill........................ 3 1dependents...........1 6 8 Temporary assignment or
Tolls: Trip outside U.S.........1 7 0 j o b .....................1 6 7
Business-related travel....1 7 4 Trip primarily for Temporary work
UTools.......................1 9 0 business.............1 6 9 location.................1 7 3
U.S. Citizen:Hauling to and from Trip primarily for personal Tips .................168, 169
work....................1 7 4 reasons ..............1 7 0 Transit pass................ 4 5 Earned Income Credit.....2 3 4
Page 289

Page 292 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
U.S. citizen or resident...... 2 5Use of home in Vouchers for payment of Alternative technology vehicle
business .................1 9 0tax ....................39, 40 credit ..................... 1U.S. national................ 2 5
Earned Income Credit....... 1Used clothing and householdU.S. obligations,
Educator expenses........1 2 7goods:interest...............53, 54
W Elective deferral amounts.... 1Charitable deduction for fairU.S. possessions:
Exemption amount.......... 1W-2 form (See Form W–2;  Formmarket value............1 5 6Charitable contributions Hope credit............ 1 ,  2 2 5W-2)Usurious interest............ 5 3t o ......................1 5 1 Individual retirementWages and salaries (See alsoUtilities:Deduction of income tax paid arrangements (IRAs)...... 1Form W-2) .......10, 42-49, 46Charges for installing includedt o ......................1 4 1 Lifetime learning credit.......1 ,Accident and healthin property basis......... 8 9Income from................ 6 225insurance................ 4 3Emergency energy programs,U.S. Postal Service (See Post Limit on itemizedAccrued leave payment..... 4 3charitable contributionsoffice employees) deduction................. 1Adoption, employert o ......................1 5 2U.S. savings bonds: Medical and dental expenses:assistance............... 4 4Energy conservationEducation, used for......... 2 0 Standard mileage......... 1Advance commissions...... 4 2subsidies............86, 88Interest on................. 8 7 Moving expenses:Allowances andLate payment charges, notTransfer between Standard mileage......... 1reimbursements......36, 42deductible..............1 4 9spouses ................. 9 2 Social security and MedicareArcher MSARebates ................... 8 8U.S. Treasury bills or notes: taxes..................... 1contributions............. 4 4
Trade of................... 9 6 Standard deduction.......... 1Awards and prizes.......... 4 2
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and Standard mileage rates...... 1Baby-sitting................ 4 2Vbonds ..................... 5 7 Tax computationBack pay awards........... 4 2Vacation homes: worksheet................ 2Bonuses ................... 4 2Unclaimed Determining if used as Tax credits for energyChild care providers........ 4 2reimbursement ...........1 8 6 home .................... 6 6 efficiency................. 1Children’s earnings.......... 6Uncollected rent: Points....................1 4 6Clergy..................... 4 6Wheelchairs:Income .................... 6 4Rental expenses.......66, 68 De minimis benefits........ 4 4 As medical expense.......1 3 6Underpayment penalties... 3 4 ,Valuations (See Fair market Disability income........... 4 8Widow/widower  (See Surviving39, 41 value (FMV); Elective deferrals........... 4 6 spouse)IRS computation........... 4 1 Appraisals)................ 8 9 Employee achievement Winter energy payments.... 8 6Undistributed capital Value of time or services: award ................... 4 2Withholding (See also Formgains............62, 106, 249 No charitable deduction Employee compensation.... 4 2 W-2)................10, 34-41Unearned income of child (See f o r............152, 154, 155 Farmworkers............... 3 4 Agricultural Act of 1949Children, subheading: Vandalism: Foreign employer........... 4 7 payments ................ 3 7Investment income of child Casualty loss due to.......1 6 0 Form W–2 (See Form W–2) Changing amountunder age 14) Fringe benefits............. 4 3Vasectomy: withheld................. 3 5Unemployment Garnisheed................ 1 1Deductibility as medical For 2007 ................ 3 5compensation ............6 ,  7 Government cost-of-livingexpense ................1 3 6 Checking amount of....... 3 5 ,Credit card insurance allowances.............. 4 3Vehicles (See Cars) 222paying................... 8 6 Household workers......... 3 4Veterans Affairs (VA): Claim for refund............. 6Mandatory contributions to state Income ...................6 ,  7Funding fees, not deductible as Commodity credit loans..... 3 7funds, deduction of......1 4 1 Foreign.................. 4 2interest............148, 149 Credit for..............34, 40Private fund, from.......... 8 4 Long-term careVeterans’ benefits........... 4 7 Cumulative wageRepayment of benefits...... 8 4 coverage ................ 4 3Educational assistance..... 8 8 method .................. 3 5Reporting on Forms 1040, Military retirees.........34, 47Tuition deduction, effect Definition.................. 3 41040A, or 1040EZ........ 8 4 Military service............. 4 7o n....................1 3 0 Determining amount toSupplemental benefits...... 8 4 MiscellaneousRetroactive withhold .............34, 35compensation............ 4 2Voluntary benefit fund determination............ 4 8 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988Note for services........... 4 3contributions............1 9 5 payments ................ 3 7Veterans’ insurance: Outplacement services..... 4 3Withholding............37, 84 Dividend income........... 6 0Dividends on............... 6 3 Religious orders............ 4 6Unemployment tax: Employers, rules for........ 3 5Veterans’ organizations: Restricted property......... 4 6State employment Exemption from............ 3 6Charitable contributions Dividends on restrictedtaxes...................2 1 3 Federal income taxes, nott o .................151, 152 stock.................. 4 6Uniform Settlement Statement deductible..............1 4 330% limit...............1 5 7 Retirement plan contributions by(Form HUD-1): Fiscal years................ 4 1Viatical settlements.....81, 82 employer ................ 4 6Points shown on..........1 4 6 Form W-4:Severance pay............. 4 3Victims of terrorism (SeeUniformed services........1 0 2 Provided by employer.... 3 5Sick pay...............43, 49Terrorist attacks)Uniforms ...................1 9 0 Fringe benefits............. 3 6Social security and MedicareVirgin Islands: Gambling winnings.....37, 40Charitable organization taxes paid byIncome from................ 6 General rules.............. 3 4requiring, deduction for cost employer ................ 4 3VISTA volunteers............ 4 7 Highest rate, employer mustand upkeep of..........1 5 4 Stock appreciation rights.... 4 3Vitamins: withhold at if no W-4...... 3 5Unions (See Labor unions) Stock options.............. 4 6Not deductible as medical Incorrect form.............. 4 0Assessments .............1 9 0 Supplemental.............. 3 6expense ................1 3 6 IRA distributions...........1 1 9Dues .....................1 9 0 Volunteer work............. 4 7Volunteer firefighters: New job ................... 3 5United States (See headings Withholding (See Withholding)Charitable contributions Penalties...........34, 36, 37starting with “Federal” or “U.S.”) Waiters and waitresses:t o ......................1 5 2 Pensions and annuities.... 1 2 ,United Way (See Charitable Tips (See Tip income)IRAs......................1 1 5 37, 70, 73contributions) War veterans’ organizationsVolunteer work.........47, 210 Railroad retirementUniversities (See Colleges and (See Veterans’ organizations)Deductibility of contributions benefits..............37, 77universities) War zone (See Combat zone)(Table 24-2)............1 5 4 Repaying withheld tax...... 3 5Unlawful discrimination suits: Wash sales...........94, 96, 99Out-of-pocket expenses, Rollovers .................. 7 3Deduction for costs......... 8 6 Washington State Supplementaldeductible when serving for Salaries and wages........ 3 4Unmarried persons (See Single Workmen’s Compensationqualified Separate returns........... 4 1taxpayers) Fund .....................1 4 1organization.......152, 154 Sick pay................... 3 6
Unrecaptured Section 1250 Welfare benefits.........29, 84Tax counseling (Volunteer Social security benefits.... 3 7 ,
gain..................97, 107 West Virginia UnemploymentIncome Tax Assistance 77
Unstated interest........89, 95 Compensation Fund .....1 4 1program) ..............9 ,  4 7 State and local income taxes,
Unused sick leave: deduction for............1 4 0Value of income lost by, not What’s new................... 1
Cash payments for........1 3 6 deductible..............1 5 5 Adoption benefits............ 1 Supplemental wages....... 3 6
Page 290

Page 293 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Meal expenses............1 8 7 Excess withholding Support test ................ 3 2Withholding(Cont.)
Qualifying education (Figure credit ...................2 4 8Withholding (FormTips (See Tip income)
27-A)...................1 8 5Head of household status and W–4) ................... 3 5Unemployment
Recordkeeping cost of keeping upcompensation........37, 84 World Trade Center attacks
requirements............1 8 8 home .................... 2 2(See Terrorist attacks)Work clothes...............1 9 0
Reimbursement for........1 8 7 Individual retirement Worthless securities........ 9 4Work-related education....1 8 4 Teachers ............185, 186 arrangements (IRAs),Business deduction: Wristwatch.................1 9 5Temporary absence from modified AGI computationQualified Write-offs (See Cancellation ofwork....................1 8 4 (Worksheet 17-1).......1 1 6expenses.........186-187 debt)Travel expenses for.......1 8 7 Pensions or annuities, jointReimbursements........1 8 7 Unclaimed returns .................. 7 2Tax benefit of...........1 8 4 Yreimbursement..........1 8 6 Roth IRA modified adjustedEducation required by employer gross income (MAGI), Yard-care workers (SeeWorkers’ compensation..... 4 9o r  b y  l a w ...............1 8 4 computation (Worksheet Domestic help)Mandatory contributions to stateEducation that qualifies for new 17-2)...................1 2 2funds, deduction of......1 4 1 Youth groups:trade or business........1 8 6 Simplified Method computationReturn to work............. 4 9 Troop leader’s travelEducation to maintain or of taxable annuity........ 7 1 expenses ...............1 5 4Worksheets:improve skills...........1 8 4 Social security or railroadCapital loss carryover......1 0 6Education to meet minimum ■retirement benefits, to figureCasualty and theftrequirements............1 8 5 taxability.............76, 77losses..................1 6 0Indefinite absence from Student loan interestwork....................1 8 5 deduction...............1 2 9
Page 291

Page 294 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Note. Use this table only if you are an individual taxpayer filing your own return.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and whether you
are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
THEN send your No payment Payment No payment Payment No payment Payment
IF you live in... return to... enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed
Alabama, Delaware, Florida,Internal RevenueGeorgia, North Carolina, Service Center 39901–0002 39901–0102 39901–0015 39901–0115 39901–0014 39901–0114Rhode Island, South Atlanta, GACarolina, Virginia
Alaska, Arizona, California,
Hawaii, Idaho, Montana,
Nevada, Oregon, Internal Revenue
Washington, Colorado, Service Center 93888–0002 93888–0102 93888–0015 93888–0115 93888–0014 93888–0114
Nebraska, New Mexico, Fresno, CA
South Dakota, Utah,
Wyoming
Arkansas, Kansas, Kentucky,Internal RevenueLouisiana, Mississippi, Service Center 73301–0002 73301–0102 73301–0015 73301–0115 73301–0014 73301–0114Oklahoma, Tennessee, Austin, TXTexas, West Virginia
Internal Revenue
New Jersey, Pennsylvania Service Center 19255–0002 19255–0102 19255–0015 19255–0115 19255–0014 19255–0114
Philadelphia, PA
Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana,Internal RevenueIowa, Michigan, Minnesota,Service Center 64999–0002 64999–0102 64999–0015 64999–0115 64999–0014 64999–0114Missouri, Ohio, North Dakota,Kansas City, MOWisconsin
District of Columbia, Maine,Internal RevenueMaryland, Massachusetts, Service Center 05501–0002 05501–0102 05501–0015 05501–0115 05501–0014 05501–0114New Hampshire, New York, Andover, MAVermont
American Samoa,
nonpermanent residents of
Guam* or the Virgin Islands**,
Puerto Rico (or if excluding Internal Revenue
income under Internal Service Center 19255–0215 19255–0215
Revenue Code section 933), Philadelphia, PA , USA
dual status aliens,
non-resident aliens, and
anyone filing Form 4563
All APO and FPO addresses,
U.S. citizens or tax residents Internal Revenue
in a foreign country, and Service Center 73301–0215 73301–0102
anyone filing Form 2555 or Austin, TX, USA
2555EZ
* Permanent residents of Guam should use:
Department of Revenue and Taxation
Government of Guam, P.O. Box 23607
GMF, GU 96921
**Permanent residents of the Virgin Islands should use:
V.I. Bureau of Internal Revenue
9601 Estate Thomas
Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas VI 00802
Page 292

Page 295 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2006
Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service—How
to Get Help With Unresolved Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465

Page 296 of 296 of Publication 17 15:10 -  6-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Package 1040-1 -- 12115e
Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order blank below.
We will mail you two copies of each form and one copy of each publication you order.
To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, such as by Internet,
see How to Get Tax Help.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
accurate address will ensure delivery of
your order. Cut the order blank on the dotted
line. Enclose the order blank in your own
envelope and send it to the IRS address
shown on this page. You should receive
your order within 10 days after we receive
your request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed on this page. Instead, see the back
cover.
TIP
Print or type your name and address accur-
ately in the space provided below. An
Mail Your Order Blank To:
Internal Revenue Service
National Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Schedule R
(1040)
8582
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829Schedules A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2005)
Pub. 1
1040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 525Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
6251
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or 1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
2441
Order Blank
Fill in your name and
address.
You can download all these items from the Internet at www.irs.govor place an electronic order for them.
The items in bold can be picked up at many IRS offices, post offices, and libraries.
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502
Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
2106-EZ
Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 926
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 535
Pub. 972
N
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
/H17073/H17073
4506